@@@ 1 @@@



e " W e

&

L WATERDEEP

DRAGON HEIST

A splendid treasure trove is yours for the taking in
y this adventure for the world’s greatest roleplaying game



@@@ 2 @@@



‘..-Il-l-..,

DRAGON HEIST

WATERDEEP



@@@ 3 @@@



CREDITS

Lead Designer: Christopher Perkins
Designers: |ames |. Haeck, James Introcaso, Adam Lee,
Matt Sernett
Rules Development: |eremy Crawford, Ben Petrisor, Kate Welch
Story Consultants: Matthew Mercer, Charles Sanders

Managing Editor: Jeremy Crawford
Lead Editor: Christopher Perkins
Editors: Michele Carter, Scott Fitzgerald Gray, Kim Mohan

Art Director: Kate Irwin

Additional Art Direction: Shauna Narciso, Richard Whitters

Graphic Designer: Emi Tanji

Cover lllustrator: Tyler Jacobson

Interior lllustrators: Mark Behm, Eric Belisle, Zoltan Boros, Clint
Cearley, Sidharth Chaturvedi, Daarken, Eric Deschamps, Oiga
Drebas, Leesha Hannigan, Ralph Horsley, Tyler Jacobson, Sam
Keiser, Julian Kok, Alayna Lemmer, Christopher Moeller, Scott
Murphy, |Jim Pavelec, Claudio Pozas, Vincent Proce, Ned Rogers,
Craig | Spearing, Jason Thompson, Cory Trego-Erdner, Richard
Whitters, Mark Winters, Shawn Wood, Bayard Wu, Kieran Yanner

Interior Cartographer: Dyson Logos

Poster Map: Jason Engle

Producers: Daniel Tovar, Matt Warren, Stan!
Product Engineer: Cynda Callaway

Imaging Technicians: Carmen Cheung, Kevin Yee
Art Administration: David Gershman

Prepress Specialist: |efferson Dunlap

Other D&D Team Members: Bart Carroll, Pelham Greene, Ari
Levitch, Chris Lindsay, Jeremy Martin, Shelly Mazzanoble, Mike
Mearls, Hilary Ross, Liz Schuh, Nathan Stewart, Greg Tito, Trish
Yochum

Cratitude to Elliott Zastrow for his extensive research,

Special thanks to the hundreds of playtesters whose feedback made
this adventure more fun at every turn.

620C4658000001 EN
ISBN: 978-0-7869-6625-7
First Printing: September 2013

987654321

FOREWORD

A simple question began rattling around in my head
over two years ago as [ was bidding farewell to Barovia,
dragging myself out of the depths of Maelstrom, and
planning a yearlong expedition to Chult. Where do we
go next? After mulling over several options, we decided
it would be refreshing to return to civilization.

Waterdeep: Dragon Heist is a treasure hunt with an
urban backdrop. We've visited Waterdeep before, but
not like this. Clever heroes will respect the city's rules.
Those who get on the city's bad side are in for a rough
time, as the City of Splendors is home to some of the
most powerful figures in the Forgotten Realms.

Charlie Sanders, a lifelong D&D player, brought his
experience writing for television to the project by help-
ing flesh out the story bible months before work on the
adventure was scheduled to begin. Matthew Mercer,
whom you might know from the livestreamed show
Critical Role, lent us his boundless imagination and
helped flesh out the villains and their motives, A D&D
adventure is only as good as its villains, and Waterdeep:
Dragon Heist has multiple baddies to choose from.

Before | pull back the curtain and lead you into the
heart of Waterdeep, 1 wish to thank Ed Greenwood for
making the City of Splendors what it is: the kind of mag-
ical place you wish in your heart was real.

Chris Perkins
December 2017

ON THE COVER

In Waterdeep, a gold coin is called a dragon, and someone has
hidden half a million dragons in the City of Splendors. Tyler
Jacobson illustrates the villains hunting for the treasure. May the
gods protect any adventurer who stands in their way!

Disclaimer: The Lords of Waterdeep cannot be held responsible for the flogging, ban-
ishmenl, incarceration, or execution of adventurers who piolote the Code Legol, nor are
the Lords responsible for the actions of beholder crime lords, unscrupulous nobles, drow
swashbucklers, and evil clones. Also, don’t be olarmed by the colossal statues scottered
throughout the city. They're quite safe and haven't gone berserk in years,

&

DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, D&D, Wizards of the Coast, Forgotten Realms, the dragon ampersand, Player’s Handbook, Monster Manual, Dungeon Master's Guide, all other Wizards of
the Coast product names, and their respective logos are trademarks of Wizards of the Coast in the USA and other countries. All characters and their distinctive likenesses are property
of Wizards of the Caast. This material is protected under the copyright laws of the United States of America. Any reproduction or unauthorized use of the material or artwork contained

herein (s prohibited without the express written permission of Wizards of the Coast.

Printed in the USA. ©2018 Wizards of the Coast LLC, PO Box 707, Renton, WA 98057-0707, USA. Manufactured by Hasbro SA, Rue Emile-Boéchat 31, 2800 Delémont, CH,

Represented by Hasbro Europe. 4 The Square, Stockley Park, Uxbridge, Middlesex, UB11 1ET, UK,



@@@ 4 @@@



CONTENTS

Pronunciation Guide ..........oooveoieveiiierennnns

INtrodUCtIOn. ... ... ieresssesssses

Ch. 3: Fireball.............cccunnrernsssnares

What's Happening Here?......cccveversnsrneres 4

Ch. 6: Hell of a Summer............cc.......

LAALE OF ABINDCILHE ... o icinsisnsissssssnssseissaions
Facing the Cassalanters .......ccccsemsesses

= ] £
115
AX7

T B T N R BRI o

Choose Your Villain........cccemeeeeerernnereness 6 'j'f“:'!i”_}{" BlASE wevvvuriarasssmsesmassssseasasasesnasanene H

COEE OIS o v i vp i o s i ek s R e s / ; 2 5
Runming the ABVeatim .« s "-":. hat H{‘HH*..‘:'I L) AT TR S R DT j
Adventure Structure.......ccussssesemissinsss 10 (_11‘:11|mnd VI i o0

3 - B R R i e e 5¢€
Adventure Flowchart.........ceccniamescannes 11 Loose End 5

Adventure Background .........cccceenmemsnnssass 11

Temple of Asmodeus........c.ccvieenrerianinans 12D

Ch. T: Mooniro's Fall..........c.auuimn 131
Level Advancement.. s 30 Scariet Marpenoth.....wimsiss 181

SPECIEl EVeIitE....uic i s 145

Ch. 8: Winter Wizardry........................ 147
KOIAt TOWEES....cuvvieereenesesssnssssersssarsssenssannns 148
Extradimensional Sanctum........c.ccceeee 157
SOCEIAL BNEIE covciviiiivicisiviniisios it ans 161

]

—

LATE AN WATETUOED «ssmmsrwmmsnsisssssersisinsse

Ch. 4: Dragon Season.............cccececvvenniee 5
Encounter Chains......csissssnesses G oS 5

Character CUreation....vcicirensssmrssnasmassess L
Character Advancement ......ccoeersssrsssssss 14
Factions in Waterdeep.......ccccvsmmrnrenneens. 14 Encounter Chains by Season .......cccvvenee D9
The Yawning Portal.............. i al. Encounter LAY D]

Oh. 55 A Bitad in Naad Encounter 2: MistsShore.......coiinisiniina DD
WV BRI DO DRI i o i i i
Zhentarim BIdeotl.....cccoesssssisrssosersssiainsr 20
The Walch AUTiUBE.....cccremiassersseminssmsens 2

2]

)1 Encounter 3: Street Chase.......ococceieenes D8
. = L . r

Encounter 4: Mausoletum...ocovcicicenenesenss DY Ch. 9: Vﬂ‘lﬂ s Waterdeep

Entering Waterdeep........cooeerenreeernisneennss 104

g Encounter 7: Old Tower ........................... 76 A Long History (in Brief)........cc............164

Surviving in the Gty cinnsniians 167
Encounter 9: Cellar Compléex......cccoeernn. 83 The Wards of Waterdeep........cccuuuiuaene 174

Encounter 10: Converted Windmill.......86 Lhe City's Splendors.mmmmermssmms ]h{.]

Tracking Floon g7 Encounter 6: Theater........uuiiscse 73
)

Xanathar Guild Hideout ...oisiiiienenas : :
Completing Volo's Quest........cc.cccerrrrreeere. 30 Encounter 8: Courthouse ...........o.cneernr. 80

Level AdVanCeImMenl . ersrsssssessnsssssasens 30

LU 2: Trollakull Alley.........ccoccorccinicisens 31

vault Keys......ue e PR Ry o 90
App. A: Magic Items............................... 189

App. B: Monsters and NPCs ............... 193

DD K2 BRERUDNEE ..o semsimsmmmsininiit ]
Yawning Portal Friendly Faces............221
IheCote Legal. cnniniicauineg i 222

Trollskull Manor and Tavern................ 223

|. Y - e i n . )
Open for Business?......inn 41 Adventure ConclUSion ....csssssissssssssies I8

Ch. 5: Spring Madness..................cc..... 99

Level Advancement.. .....oovrimrctessssmresssressos e

Foiling Xanathar's Operation............... 100
—
Special Events.......ccouie R 114

Key to the Yawning Portal...........ccoernnne. 224



@@@ 5 @@@



PrRONUNCIATION GUIDE

This guide shows how to pronounce many of the non-English names that appear in this adventure.

Name

Agorn Fuoco
Ahghairon
Ahmaergo
Alcedor Kolat
Alturiak (month)
Amath Sercent

Ammalia Cassalanter

Arn Xalrondar
Aurinax

Avareen Windrivver
Bregan D'aerthe
Corylus Thann
Davil Starsong
Duhlark Kolat
Eleasis (month)
Eleint (month)
Esvele Rosznar
Fala Lefaliir
Fel'rekt Lafeen
Fenerus Stormcastle
Flamerule (month)
Floon Blagmaar
Hlam

Holvan Ebberek
Hrabbaz

Hyustus Staget
lokaste Daliano
Istrid Horn
Jalester Silvermane
Jarlaxle Baenre
Jelenn Urmbrusk
Jeryth Phaulkon
Jezrynne Hornraven
Kaevja Cynavern
Kalain

Karabal L'enz
Khafeyta Murzan
Korgstrod Uxgulm
Krebbyg Masq'il'yr
Kythorn (month)
Laeral Silverhand
Laiba Rosse
Llorath Pharn
Losser Mirklay
Manshoon

Margo Verida

Pronunciation
AY-gorn foo-OH-koh
ah-GAIR-awn
ah-MAIR-go
awl-SEE-door KOH-lat
awl-TUR-ee-ak
AH-math SER-sent
ah-MAW-lee-ah KAS-ah-lan-ter
ARN zal-RON-dar
OR-ah-nax
ah-vah-REEN
BRAY-gan DAIRTH
KOR-eh-luss

DAH-vil

doo-LARK KOH-lat
eh-LEE-sis

eh-LAINT

EZ-veh-lay RAW|-nar
FAH-lah LEF-ah-leer
FEL-rekt lah-FEEN
FEN-er-us
FLAME-rool

FLOON BLAG-mar
huh-LAWM

HOLE-van EBB-er-ek
hrah-BAWZ

HEW-stus STAG-it
i-oh-KAW-stay daw-lee-AH-noh
ISS-trid

JAH-less-ter
jar-LAX-ull BANE-ray
juh-LEN URM-brusk
JAIR-ith FAWL-kon
JEZ-rin

CAVE-yah SIN-ah-vern
kah-LAIN
KAWR-ah-bawl LENZ
kah-FAY-tah mur-ZAWN
KORG-strawd UX-gulm
KREH-big MASK-il-eer
KY-thorn

LAIR-awl

LAY-bah ROSS-uh
LOR-ath FARN
LOSS-er MER-klav
man-SHOON

MAR-go veh-REE-dah

Name

Marro Qaz'arrt
Mattrim Mereg
Melannor Fellbranch
Meloon Wardragon
Mirt

Mirtul (month)
Nar'l Xibrindas
Nihiloor

Obaya Uday

Orond Gralhund
Raelyn Auvryndar
Remallia Haventree
Renaer Neverember
Rishaal

Rongquan Mystere
Saeth Cromley
Savra Belabranta
Seffia Naelryke
Sidra Romeir

Skarn Zarphoul
Skeemo Weirdbottle
Soluun Xibrindas
Talisolvanar Fellbranch
Tarsakh (month)
Tashlyn Yafeera
Tissina Khyret

Tylan llueph
Umbero Zastro
Urlaster Ghann
Urstul Floxin

Vaelle Lurval

Vajra Safahr

Velgos Ephezzrin
Vevette Blackwater
Vhaspar Holmdreg
Victoro Cassalanter
Volkarr Kibbens
Volothamp Geddarm
Westra Moltimmur
Xanathar

Yagra Stonefist
Yalah Gralhund
Yaliek lltizmar
Zaibon Kyszalt

Ziraj the Hunter
Zorbog Jyarkoth

Pronunciation

MAW-row kah-ZART
MAT-trim MAIR-egg
MEL-ah-nor

may-LOON

MERT or MEERT

MER-tul

NAR-ul zeh-BRIN-das
NYE-heh-lure
oh-BYE-yah oo-DAY
oh-ROND GRAWL-hoond
RAY-lin ah-VRIN-dar
reh-MAW-lee-ah
reh-NAIR

ree-SHAWL

RONG-kwan mis-TAIR
SAYTH KROM-lee
SAV-rah bel-ah-BRAN-tah
SEF-yah NAIlL-rike
SID-rah roh-MEER
SKARN ZAR-fool
SKEE-moh

soh-LOON zeh-BRIN-das
tal-iss-AWL-van-ar
TAR-sack

TASH-lin yah-FEER-ah
teh-SEE-nah KYE-ret
TYE-lan ill-O0-eff
um-BAIR-oh ZASS-troh
ur-LASS-ter GAN
UR-stool FLOX-in
vay-ELLE lur-VAWL
VO)-rah sah-FAR
VEL-gohs eh-FEZ-rin
veh-VET

VASS-par HOLM-dreg
vik-TOR-oh KAS-ah-lan-ter
VOAL-kar KIB-enz
VOH-loh-thamp geh-DARM
WES-trah MOLT-im-ur
ZAN-ah-thar

YAG-raw

YAW-law GRAWL-hoond
yah-LEEK ill-TIZ-mar
ZYE-bawn kij-ALT
zeer-AW|

ZOR-bog jee-AR-koth



@@@ 6 @@@



ITRODUCTION

| ELCOME TO WATERDEEP, THE CROWN OF
the North, where a wondrous tale of urban
adventure is about to unfold. Our story
begins with the gathering of adventurers
at the Yawning Portal Inn and Tavern.
Volothamp Geddarm, the famous explorer
_ and raconteur, has a quest for them—one
that entangles the characters in a bitter conflict between
two nefarious organizations. If the adventurers com-
plete his quest, Volo rewards them handsomely. Yet a
‘much greater prize lies hidden somewhere in the City of
‘Splendors, waiting to be claimed.

Waterdeep: Dragon Heist is a DUNGEONS & DRAGONS
adventure designed for characters starting at 1st level.
By the end of the story, the characters will be at least
Sth level. If vou're planning to run through the adven-
ture as a player, stop reading now!

If you're looking for higher-level adventure content set
in Waterdeep, a companion product titled Warerdeep:
Dungeon of the Mad Mage explores the vast dungeon
under Waterdeep known as Undermountain and is de-
signed for characters of levels all the way up to 20th.

STORY OVERVIEW

Waterdeep: Dragon Heist is a treasure hunt set against
an urban backdrop. The adventure’s plot can be summa-
rized as follows:

« Half a million gold coins are hidden somewhere in
Waterdeep. Many individuals know about the cache
and are looking for it. Adventurers can join the hunt
and prevent the cache from falling into evil hands.

« The city is threatened by escalating tension between
two power groups that is on the verge of flaring into
violence, The Zhentarim, a shadowy network of mer-
cenaries, and Xanathar, the beholder erime lord of
Waterdeep, are at odds, and when they clash, the char-
acters are pulled into the conflict.

CACHE OF DRAGONS

In Waterdeep, a gold coin is called a dragon. Before he
was ousted from his position as the Open Lord of Water-
deep, Dagult Neverember embezzled half a million
dragons and hid them in a secret vault. As a security
precaution, he arranged for all knowledge of the vault's
location and defenses to be magically erased from his
mind and the minds of his subordinates, The wizard
who performed the procedure trapped this knowledge
within an artifact called the Stone of Golorr. The wizard
disappeared shortly thereafter, and Dagult hid the stone
in the Palace of Waterdeep.

Dagult was off rebuilding the city of Neverwinter when
the other Lords of Waterdeep voted him out of office. He
immediately made plans to retrieve the Stone of Golorr
and smuggle his cache of dragons out of Waterdeep. His
spies plucked the stone from the palace but were killed
while trying to leave the city. The stone was stolen and
passed from one hand to another like a common jewel
until it wound up in the clutches of Xanathar.

UsiING THE POSTER Map

The map in the back of this book has the city of Waterdeep
on both sides. One side can be shown to players. The
other side is for the DM and includes tags marking import-
ant locations in the adventure.

T R e

The Stone of Golorr is actually an aboleth transformed
by magic. In this inanimate state, the aboleth can read
the mind of any creature that attunes to the stone, as
well as modify that creature’s memory. A creature at-
tuned to the stone can also extract information from the
aboleth, including lore about Neverember's vault.

Built long ago by dwarves, the vault is warded against
all forms of magical detection and intrusion. Its current
protector is an adult gold dragon named Aurinax, who
is also the current wielder and guardian of the dragon-
staff of Ahghairon, which has the power to prevent other
dragons from entering the city. In exchange for the staff,
Aurinax promised to guard the gold until such time as
Neverember or his appointed vassals removed it.

WAR IN THE STREETS

Beneath the city streets lurks a eriminal underworld,
its leader a beholder called Xanathar. Hoping to gain a
political foothold in Waterdeep, agents of the Zhentarim
(also known as the Black Network) recently tried to ally
their organization with the Xanathar Guild. The archi-
tect of this attempt was a clone of the wizard Manshoon,
a founder of the Black Network long thought dead.

While the two sides were negotiating in Xanathar’s
lair, the Stone of Golorr suddenly disappeared from
where Xanathar had hidden it. The paranoid beholder
accused the Black Network of stealing it and slew the
Zhentarim envoys who were present. When the Zhents
retaliated by attacking Xanathar Guild outposts, Xana-
thar took their actions as confirmation of the Black
Network's vile intentions. Now the bad blood between
the Zhentarim and Xanathar has begun to spill into the
streets, threatening peace throughout the city.

Who actually stole the Stone of Golorr? The answer:
a rock gnome named Dalakhar. After Lord Neverember
used magic to discern the gemstone’s location, he sent
forth a succession of spies to infiltrate Xanathar’s lair
and obtain it. Dalakhar succeeded where many others
before him had failed, but his success turns out to he
short-lived.

VoLO'S QUEST 4

The Yawning Portal serves as the default starting point
for this story. One of the first people the adventurers
meet there is Volothamp Geddarm. He has just returned
from a tour promoting his latest book, Volos Guide to X
Monsters, and he has a quest for the characters.

One of Volo's friends, a handsome simpleton named
Floon Blagmaar, has disappeared, seemingly kid-
napped. The search for Floon leads to the revelation
that he was caught up in a case of mistaken identity, and
the characters are actually looking for two victims. The
intended target was Lord Neverember’s estranged son,

INTRODUCTION



@@@ 7 @@@



B — -

AHGHAIRON’S DRAGONWARD

Waterdeep is blanketed by an undispellable magical effect
called Ahghairon’s dragonward. The effect originates from
somewhere under Ahghairon's Tower in the Castle Ward
and is permanent. Dragons and all other creatures of the
dragon type are physically unable to enter the city (or its
sewers) as long as the dragonward persists. The effect
doesn’t extend to the harbor or into Undermountain.

A creature of the dragon type that is touched by the
dragonstaff of Ahghairon (see appendix A) can ignore Ah-
ghairon’s dragonward and move through the city freely. The
effect lasts until the creature is touched again by the staff,
or until the passage of a period of time specified by one
who is attuned to the staff.

The dragonstaff is currently in the possession of an adult
gold dragon named Aurinax (see appendix B), who guards
a hidden vault under the city.

————— Pe— ——

_”-'_Il

Renaer Neverember. Agents of the Zhentarim waylaid
him because they want to know everything that Renaer
knows about the cache of dragons. (Unfortunately for
them, Renaer is ignorant of the cache and its where-
abouts.) If the characters rescue him, Renaer proves to
be a worthy ally to adventurers hoping to make a name
for themselves in Waterdeep.

As a reward for rescuing Floon, Volo gives adventur-
ers the deed to a building in the North Ward that looks
out onto a wide cul-de-sac hemmed in by old residences
and shops. The property used to be a tavern with a res-
idence on the upper floors. The tavern has been closed
for years, and the residence is haunted by a poltergeist
that the characters can lay to rest.

FIREBALL!

As time goes on, the characters attract the attention of
local factions hoping to recruit them while they settle
into the city. Eventually, these relatively peaceful times
are shattered when a fireball detonates near their new
residence. The characters are swept up in the aftermath
of this horrific event and can try to get to the bottom of
it. Who cast the fireball spell and why? Who was the
intended target? They can investigate the incident on be-
half of a guild or a faction, or they can become involved
for reasons of their owrn.

One casualty of the fireball is in fact its intended tar-
get: Lord Neverember's spy, Dalakhar, Whoever killed
the gnome now has the Stone of Golorr, the key to find-
ing the lost cache of dragons. One way or another, de-
pending on the alliances—and the enemies—they have
made in the city, the characters become embroiled in
the chase for the stone and the hoard it protects.

CHOOSE YOUR VILLAIN

When you run this adventure, you choose its main vil-
lain at the outset. Your choice determines the season of
the year in which the story takes place, as well as the an-
tagonists in several of the encounters in chapter 4, The
villain you choose opposes the player characters, while
the villains you don’t choose become part of the back-
drop and could help the characters or hinder them.

As another unusual feature of this adventure, the
villains aren’t meant to be killed, nor are they out to kill
 the player characters. The villains are after a treasure

L INTRODUCTION

hoard, and the adventurers’ ultimate goal is to keep the
treasure out of their clutches,

You can swap out one villain for another at any time.
For example, if you decide halfway through the ad-
venture that because of how the story has progressed
Jarlaxle Baenre would make a better antagonist than
Xanathar, you can make that change on the fly and run
subsequent encounters accordingly.

Each villain is fully described in appendix B and sum-
marized below.

XANATHAR

Xanathar is a paranoid, megalomaniacal beholder crime
lord whose goal is to wipe out anyone it perceives as a
Zhentarim operative or sympathizer, retrieve the Stone
of Golorr, and secure the cache of dragons. Its base is a
dungeon under Skullport, a subterranean settlement be-
neath Waterdeep. This lair is described in chapter 5.

Xanathar has a healthy fear of Laeral Silverhand and
is inclined to spare those in her employ, to avoid provok-
ing a conflict with Waterdeep's Open Lord. Adventurers
who incur the wrath of the beholder can use its fear of
Laeral to escape certain death.

[f you choose Xanathar as the villain, the adventure
takes place in the spring.

THE CASSALANTERS

Victoro and Ammalia Cassalanter are Waterdavian no-
bles and secret devil worshipers. The Cassalanters plan
to use the cache of dragons to buy back the souls of their
children, which they traded to Asmodeus for power,
Their estate, Cassalanter Villa, has a temple of Asmo-
deus hidden underneath it, as described in chapter 6.

The Cassalanters try to misdirect and discredit the
characters rather than murder them. Victoro and Am-
malia rely on their noble status to protect them, and the
last thing they want is the City Watch on their doorstep.

If you choose the Cassalanters as the villains, the ad-
venture takes place in the summer.

JARLAXLE BAENRE

Jarlaxle Baenre is a drow swashbuckler and the secret
lord of Luskan, the City of Sails. Jarlaxle plans to use
the cache of dragons to buy his way into the Lords'
Alliance, a confederation of cities and towns that band
together against common threats. Jarlaxle also wants
the dragonstaff of Ahghairon for leverage in his nego-
tiations. In the magical guise of a human sea captain
named Zardoz Zord, Jarlaxle runs a traveling carnival
called the Sea Maidens Faire and lairs aboard a ship in
Waterdeep's harbor that has a submarine (the Scarlet
Marpenoth) underneath it, as described in chapter 7.

Jarlaxle delights in thwarting his enemies, enjoys the
complications that arise when adventurers try to meddle
in his affairs, and loves to see the looks on their faces
when he finally gets the better of them. He doesn't suffer
fools who threaten him, however. If forced into a violent
confrontation, he swiftly and brutally kills someone to
make an example of them and then walks off.

If you choose Jarlaxle as the villain, the adventure
takes place in the autumn.



@@@ 8 @@@



MANSHOON

A clone of the wizard Manshoon, one of the founders of
the Zhentarim, is hiding in Waterdeep. He wants to rule
the city, by claiming the cache of dragons and by using
that wealth to bribe the Masked Lords into making him
the new Open Lord. He also wants to regain control of
the Black Network. Manshoon lurks in Kolat Towers, a
pair of wizards' towers in the Trades Ward. This resi-
dence is described in chapter 8.

Manshoon creates copies of himself using the simula-
crum spell and takes great pains to conceal his identity,
since his success hinges on not attracting the attention
of others who would seek to thwart him before his plans
come to fruition, Manshoon avoids unnecessary con-
frontations with adventurers; only those who enter his
extradimensional sanctum are likely to incur his wrath.

If you choose Manshoon as the villain, the adventure
takes place in the winter.

SEASONS

The adventure unfolds in a particular season depending
on the villain you choose at the outset. If you switch to a
new villain midway through the adventure, don’t change
the season to match unless the characters take enough
downtime for seasons to change naturally.

SPRING

In Waterdeep, early spring tends to be cold and damp.
Misty rain falls for days on end. It's common for fog to
settle at night and last through the day. As the weather
improves, the city attracts more visitors, and the streets
become increasingly crowded as summer approaches.

SUMMER

Summers in Waterdeep are quite comfortable, and it’s a
great time for citizens and visitors to congregate outside.
The markets are busier than at any other time of year.
Sometimes, though, warm air pushes up from the south
and settles in the valleys north and east of the city. This
air gets trapped, creating a hot spell that might last days
or weeks. Activity in the city slows to a crawl, since Wa-
terdavians are unaccustomed to such heat.

AUTUMN

Throughout autumn, wagonloads of food arrive in Wa-
terdeep from outlying farms. Without this bounty, city
folk would starve during the winter. Cold, howling sea
winds remind Waterdavians that winter is near,

WINTER

Waterdavian winters are harsh. As snow piles up around
the city and ice fills the harbor, trade grinds to a halt and
the city seals its gates. Citizens willing to brave the cold
still gather in local taverns and festhalls, but few venture
outside the city walls.

I R R R R R R RRRRRRRRRRRRRRERRRRREBRRRRERRR =S
FAERONIAN CALENDAR

The Faer(inian calendar has twelve months that roughly
correspond to the months of the Gregorian calendar. Each
month has thirty days divided into three ten-day weeks
(each week is called a tenday). Scattered throughout the
year are five holidays that aren't considered part of any
month. Once every four years, the holiday of Shieldmeet is
added to the calendar as a leap day immediately following
Midsummer night. Collectively, these days create a cycle
similar to what we have on Earth: three 365.day years fol-
lowed by a leap year.

Months, The Faerlinian months are Hammer, Alturiak,
Ches, Tarsakh, Mirtul, Kythorn, Flamerule, Eleasis, Eleint,
Marpenoth, Uktar, and Nightal.

Annual Holidays. The annual holidays are Midwinter
(between Hammer and Alturiak), Greengrass (between
Tarsakh and Mirtul), Midsummer (between Flamerule and
Eleasis), Highharvestide (between Eleint and Marpenoth),
and the Feast of the Moon (between Uktar and Nightal).

—

RUNNING THE ADVENTURE

To run this adventure, you need the D&D fifth edition
core rulebooks: Player's Handbook, Dungeon Master's
Guide, and Monster Manual. The Sword Coast Adven-
turer’s Guide is helpful, but not necessary.

L L
Text that appears in a box like this is meant to be read

aloud or paraphrased for the players when their charac-
ters first arrive at a location or under a specific circum-
stance, as described in the text.

The Monster Manual contains stat blocks for most of
the creatures found in this adventure. All the necessary
stat blocks are included there or in appendix B. When a
creature's name appears in bold type, that's a visual cue
for you to look up the creature’s stat block in the Mon-
ster Manual, unless the adventure’s text instead refers
you to the monster appendix in this book.

Spells and equipment mentioned in the adventure are
described in the Player’s Handbook. Magic items are
described in the Dungeon Master’s Guide, unless the
adventure's text directs you to an item’s description in
appendix A.

ABBREVIATIONS
The following abbreviations appear in this book:

hp = hit points LG = lawful good
AC = Armor Class CG = chaotic good
DC = Difficulty Class NG = neutral good

LN = lawful neutral
N = neutral

CN = chaotic neutral
LE = lawful evil

XP = experience points

pp = platinum piece(s)

gp = gold piece(s)

ep = electrum piece(s)

sp = silver piece(s)

cp = copper piece(s)

NPC = nonplayer character

CE = chaotic evil
NE = neutral evil
DM = Dungeon Master

INTRODUCTION



@@@ 9 @@@







@@@ 10 @@@







@@@ 11 @@@



MAKE WATERDEEP YOUR OWN

Much has been written about Waterdeep over the years.
This book presents much of that information, but you
aren't bound by it. Feel free to embellish and change what
you will. Your version of Waterdeep is the only version that
matters for your campaign.

~gr—

ADVENTURE STRUCTURE

Waterdeep: Dragon Heist consists of an introductory
adventure designed to familiarize player characters with
the city of Waterdeep and provide them with a base of
operations (chapters 1 and 2), followed by a citywide
treasure hunt (chapters 3 and 4) and descriptions of the
villains' lairs (chapters 5 through 8).

In chapter 1, the characters arrive at the Yawning Por-
tal, where Volo gives them a quest. It’s a straightforward
rescue mission with a twist involving a case of mistaken
identity. If the adventurers complete the quest, Volo re-
wards them with a valuable piece of property.

In chapter 2, the characters explore their new home
in Trollskull Alley and attract the attention of factions
interested in recruiting them for special missions.

Chapter 3 begins days or weeks later, allowing char-
acters time to adjust to city life and pursue their own
interests. An explosion tears through Trollskull Alley,
prompting an investigation that hurls the characters into
conflict with some secondary villains, culminating in a
bloody confrontation at a noble estate.

In chapter 4, the characters race to find the gold. The
encounters in this chapter and the order in which they
occur change depending on the villain you've chosen.
The chapter concludes with the discovery of Lord Nev-
erember’s treasure vault and a showdown with its gold
dragon guardian. The characters’ ultimate goal is to pre-
vent the gold from falling into the hands of the bad guys.
If all goes well, some of the gold will find its way into the
characters' pockets. Characters will have a hard time
claiming it all for themselves, however.

Chapters 5 through 8 describe the lairs of the story's
villains and can be used at any time, in any order, or
not at all. The characters might have reason to visit one
or more of these lairs in the course of the adventure.
Thwarting the villains doesn’t require the characters to
invade their lairs or defeat them in combat, so it’s pos-
sible to complete the adventure without these chapters
coming into play.

Be prepared to make adjustments on the fly if the
characters find themselves in a villain's lair prior to
completing chapter 4, as the challenges within each

¥ lair are difficult for characters of lower than 5th level to
overcome. You can gently steer characters in a different
direction, drop hints that urge them to use extreme
caution, or make deadly encounters easier. It also bears
remembering that the villains are meant to be thwarted,
not killed, and they are rarely spoiling for a fight. Ad-
venturers who get in over their heads can be knocked
unconscious rather than killed. Such characters might
awaken in an alley, a sewer tunnel, or a prison cell, with
or without their gear. Conversely, they might awaken
safe and sound with all their gear in a private residence,
being cared for by friendly NPCs who took them in.

MINTRODUCTION

VoLO'S WATERDEEP ENCHIRIDION

The special chapter of this book titled “Volo's Waterdeep
Enchiridion” is a tour of the City of Splendors. If you're
unfamiliar with Waterdeep, review this section before
running the adventure. You can also share this section
with players whose characters would know general in-
formation about the city.

LIFE IN WATERDEEP

City-based adventures can be challenging to run, espe-
cially if vour player characters are inclined to wander.
Keeping the characters in Waterdeep, where the action
is, requires that they feel at home. To that end, here are
some points to keep in mind:

» Almost anything can be bought or sold in Waterdeep.
There's no need for adventurers to shop elsewhere,

« Waterdavians generally hold adventurers in high re-
gard, given that many of the city's most esteemed citi-
zens are former adventurers and that the city has been
saved countless times by adventurers over the years.

» Adventurers who are invested in the city are less
likely to want to leave it. As your players flesh out their
characters’ backgrounds, encourage them to establish
roots in Waterdeep. The adventure further invests
the characters by awarding them property in the city
and giving them opportunities to join local factions
and guilds.

BREAKING THE LAW

Waterdeep is a city of firm laws and swift justice. Adven-
turers hell-bent on slaughter and plunder won't fare well
in the City of Splendors. The punishments for assault,
arson, theft, and murder are severe, regardless of the
reason for the crime.

If the characters express interest in knowing more
about ¢crimes and punishments in Waterdeep, give them
the Code Legal handout in appendix C.

Characters who overtly engage in criminal behavior
are quickly cornered and arrested by members of the
City Watch, Those charged with committing a crime
are brought before a magister to be judged. Advocates
might intercede on behalf of the characters if they have
allied themselves with influential NPCs and factions.
For example, characters who become agents of the
Lords’ Alliance are more likely to be excused for crimes
if Laeral Silverhand, the Open Lord of Waterdeep, has
cause to let them off the hook.

Given how strictly laws are enforced in Waterdeep, it's
possible that the adventure could end with one or more
of the characters being exiled, sentenced to several
years of hard labor, imprisoned, or put to death. If that's
how their adventure ends, so be it. Hopefully, your next
group will fare better.

ARRESTING CHARACTERS

When the authorities show up to arrest ane or more
player characters for breaking the law, you can handle
the arrest in one of two ways.

The first approach is to roleplay the encounter with
the arresting officers of the City Watch. The benefit



@@@ 12 @@@



ADVENTURE FLOWCHART

——
CHAPTER |:

A FRIEND IN NEED
Volo gives the adventurers

a quest and an estate as
' their reward.
1 %

CHAPTER 2:
TROLLSKULL ALLEY
Adventurers settle into their
new estate and meet the

neighbors.

CHAPTER 3:
FIREBALL

A fireball explodes in Troll-
skull Alley, setting off an

investigation.

r

| CHAPTER 4:
DRAGON SEASON

Adventurers join the race
to find and unlock the Vault

of Dragons.

i

CHAPTER 5:
SPRING MADNESS
Adventurers invade Xanathar's |
dungeon under the city and confront |
the beholder in its lair.

ar — -

CHAPTER 6:
HELL OF A SUMMER

Adventurers storm House
Cassalanter and make a o

MAESTRO'S FALL
Adventurers board Jarlaxle's ships
- | and learn the sinister secrets of the
o Sea Maidens Faire.

i .

B
diabolical discovery. " g
CHAPTER 7: -

g

gl i vl 2 < CHAPTER 8:
=, eyt 1 S WINTER WIZARDRY
- S ‘:Ti"' Adventurers search Kolat Towers

for Manshoon's clone and find his

e : extradimensional den.

ADVENTURE BACKGROU.

—
GoLp EMBEZZLED

Lord Dagult Neverember embezzles
half a million gold pieces and hides
them in the Vault of Dragons,

STONE CRAFTED B A
Dagult hires a wizard to create the

Stone of Golorr, then hides the artifact
int the Palace of Waterdeep.

. r

DAcuLT OUSTED

Dagult leaves Waterdeep to rebuild
Neverwinter and is ousted as Open

Lord of Waterdeep.

Ly

STONE STOLEN

The Stone of Golorr is stolen from the
Palace of Waterdeep and ends up in
Xanathar's possession.

h

As Zhents loyal to Manshoon try to
forge an alliance with Xanathar, the

1
STONE STOLEN AGAIN
Stone of Golorr is stolen.

ALLIANCE ENDED

War erupts when Xanathar accuses
the Zhents of stealing the Stone of
Golorr, which they didn't do,

|

DALAKHAR FLEES

Dalakhar, a gnome thief working for ;
Dagult, tries to smuggle the Stone of -
Golorr out of Waterdeep. |

DALAKHAR DIES

Dalakhar is killed by a fireball spell.
Urstul Floxin steals the Stone of
Golorr from Dalakhar’s corpse.

INTRODUCTION:



@@@ 13 @@@



of this approach is that characters can choose to go
quietly or resist. The drawback is that the encounter
might devolve into a fight-or-flight situation, leading to
one or more characters becoming fugitives. If the party
includes one or more characters who aren't lawtul, such
an outcome is likely. To mitigate this drawback, you
might allow fugitive characters to forge alliances with
NPCs who can help clear their names.

[f the threat of arrest becomes tedious, vou can switch
to the second approach, which is to merely inform the
players that one or more characters have been arrested.
You can describe the arrest, the subsequent detention,
and the events leading up to the trial. The drawback to
this approach is that player characters have no control
over the situation. (This sense of helplessness has the
virtue of being realistic, if not fun.) To mitigate this
drawback, you might allow characters to make ability
checks to influence the outcome; for example, a success-
ful Charisma (Persuasion) check might enable a charac-
ter to bribe an official or sow enough doubt in the mind
of a magistrate to have the case thrown out.

il | -

Naminc NPCs

Important NPCs in the adventure are given names, but
many of the secondary NPCs aren't named. Xanathar's
Guide to Everything contains an appendix of tables you
can use to randomly generate names for human and non-
human NPCs if you have trouble coming up with names
on your own,

CHARACTER CREATION

If yvour players are creating 1st-level characters for this
adventure, consider setting aside the first game session
for character creation. That way, the players can flesh
out their adventuring party together and come up with
reasons why their characters are friends.

BRINGING THE PARTY TOGETHER

The Yawning Portal is a popular adventurers’ hangout.
Unless you have a better idea, assume that the charac-
ters are familiar with the establishment and have met
there before. If any of the characters are new to the city,
they can be drawn to the Yawning Portal by its reputa-
tion or summeoned there by Volo.

To make the Yawning Portal feel like a familiar, wel-
coming place, give the players a copy of the Yawning
Portal Familiar Faces handout in appendix C and allow
each player to select one NPC as a friendly acquain-
tance. Additional information about these NFCs can be
found at the end of this introduction.

BUYING EQUIPMENT AT 1ST LEVEL

All the equipment in chapter 5 of the Player's Handbook
is available for purchase in Waterdeep at normal prices.

CHARACTER BACKGROUNDS

Players looking for background options beyond those
described in the Player's Handbook can find several ap-



@@@ 14 @@@



propriate ones in the Sword Coast Adventurer’s Guide:
City Watch, cloistered scholar, courtier, faction agent,

far traveler, inheritor, mercenary veteran, urban bounty
hunter, and Waterdavian noble. If you have access to this
book, consider making its background options available
to your players’ characters.

WATERDAVIAN NOBLE FAMILIES

Waterdeep contains well over a hundred noble families.
The following noble houses are fine choices for any
character with the noble background from the Player’s
Handbook or the Waterdavian noble background from
the Sword Coast Adventurer’s Guide.

House Amcathra, The Amcathras are a Tethyrian
family that specializes in horse breeding and training,
cattle ranching, wine-making, and weaponsmithing, The
family motto is “We trample our troubles.” The family
has a large villa in the North Ward. on the east side of
the High Road between Hassantyr's Street and Tar-
nath Street.

House Margaster. The Margasters are an [lluskan
family whose business interests lie in land-based ship-
ping and bulk goods trading. The house also has a quiet
history of wizardry. The family motto is “Nothing is be-
yond our grasp.” The Margaster family estate is situated
between Stabbed Sailor Alley and Shattercrock Alley in
the North Ward.

House Phylund. The Phylunds are a Tashlutar family
that captures and sells monsters. Monsters that can't
be trained as pets or guard beasts are sold to arenas
or harvested for their meat, bones, and skins. The Phy-
lunds sponsor adventuring parties and monster-hunt-
ing expeditions, and their motto is “What you fear, we
master.” House Phylund has an estate on Copper Street,
west of the High Road between Julthoon Street and
Trader's Way in the North Ward.

GuiLps OF WATERDEEP

Bakers’ Guild

Carpenters’, Roofers’, and Plaisterers’ Guild
Cellarers’ and Plumbers' Cuild

Coopers’ Guild

Council of Farmer-Grocers _

Council of Musicians, Instrument-makers, and Choristers
Dungsweepers’ Guild

Fellowship of Bowyers and Fletchers

Fellowship of Carters and Coachmen

Fellowship of innkeepers

Fellowship of Salters, Packers, and Joiners
Fishmongers’ Felfowship

Guild of Apothecaries and Physicians

Guild of Butchers

Cuild of Chandlers and Lamplighters

Guild of Fine Carvers

Guild of Glassblowers, Glaziers, and Spectacle-makers
Guild of Stonecutters, Masons, Potters, and Tile-makers
Guild of Trusted Pewterers and Casters

Cuild of Watermen

Jesters’ Guild

jewelers’ Guild

House Rosznar. Once banished from Waterdeep for
smuggling, slavery, and other crimes, this Tethyrian
house has returned and is trving to overcome its dark
past and disgraceful reputation by focusing on legiti-
mate business ventures such as wine-making and gem
trading. The family motto is “We fly high and stoop
swift.” Rosznar Villa is situated on Thunderstaff Way be-
tween Copper Street and Shield Street in the Sea Ward,
west of the High Road.

Lady Esvele Rosznar (see “The Black Viper” in appen-
dix B) is a member of this house, though she keeps her
masked identity and thieving escapades a secret,

GuiLD MEMBERSHIP

Any characters with the guild artisan background are
assumed to have free membership in one Waterdeep
guild of their choice. Arcane spellcasters living in the
city are required by law to register with the Watchful Or-
der of Magists and Protectors, so that they can be called
on to defend the city with their magic in times of need.

Waterdeep's most prominent guilds appear on the
Guilds of Waterdeep list. By law, there are no active
thieves' guilds in Waterdeep, and the Xanathar Guild
isn't an actual guild but a faction (see “Factions in Wa-
terdeep,” page 14).

To join a guild, one must possess a background, a pro-
ficiency, or a status that the guild values. For example, a
character with the sailor background is welcome to join
the Master Mariners' Guild. One can practice a profes-
sion and not be a guild member, but such autonomy car-
riecs a cost. The guilds do evervthing they can to entice
new members to join and pay for membership, and they
go out of their way to hinder independent business own-
ers, up to and including driving them out of business. A
baker who refuses to join the Bakers' Guild might find
her flour supply cut off, while a wizard who refuses to

Launderers’ Guild

League of Basket-makers and Wickerworkers

League of Skinners and Tanners

Loyal Order of Street Laborers

Master Mariners’ Guild

Most Careful Order of Skilled Smiths and Metalforgers

Most Excellent Order of Weavers and Dyers

Order of Cobblers and Corvisers

Order of Master Shipwrights

Order of Master Tailors, Glovers, and Mercers

Saddlers' and Harness-makers’ Guild

Scriveners', Scribes’, and Clerks' Guild .
Solemn Order of Recognized Furriers and Woolmen
Splendid Order of Armarers, Locksmiths, and Finesmiths
Stablemasters’ and Farriers' Guild

Surveyors’, Map-, and Chart-makers' Guild

Vintners’, Distillers', and Brewers' Guild

Wagon-makers' and Coach Builders’ Guild

Watchful Order of Magists and Protectors

Wheelwrights' Guild

INTRODUCTION.



@@@ 15 @@@



i _— —_— L .

TRACKING RENOWN

This adventure includes side quests available only to
characters who join the factions described in this adven-
ture, You can use the optional renown rules in chapter 1
of the Dungeon Master’s Guide to track a character’s rank
and ascent within a given faction. The Dungeon Master’s
Guide gives names for various ranks within the Harpers,
the Emerald Enclave, the Lords’ Alliance, the Order of the
Gauntlet, and the Zhentarim. Rank names for members of

Bregan D'aerthe, Force Grey, and the Xanathar Guild are
given below, with the renown needed to attain each rank.

Bregan D’aerthe Ranks: Orbb (private, 1), Kyorlinorbb
(corporal, 3), Khal'abbil (sergeant, 10), Mallasargtlin (lieu-
tenant, 25), llareth (captain, 50)

Force Grey Ranks: Gray Hand Initiate (1), Junior Gray
Hand (3), Senior Gray Hand (10}, Force Grey Initiate (25),
Defender of Waterdeep (50)

Xanathar Guild Ranks: Eyestalker (1), Agent of the Eye
(3), Eye Ray (10), Guild Boss (25), Hand of the Eye (50

join the Watchful Order of Magists and Protectors might
be denied access to sages, libraries, and other useful
resources,

Guilds charge members monthly or yearly dues that
vary. For simplicity, you can have a guild charge 1 gp per
month or 10 gp for a year's dues paid in advance, A guild
can expel a member for any number of reasons, not the

least of which is failing to pay dues.

FACcTION MEMBERSHIP

A character with the faction agent background (de-
scribed in the Sword Coast Adventurer’s Guide) must
choose a faction to belong to (see “Factions in Water-
deep” below). Characters without this background can
join factions once they reach the end of chapter 1 of this
adventure.

CHARACTER ADVANCEMENT

You can track experience points or simply allow char-
acters to level up when they reach certain points in the
adventure. [deally, the characters should fall within the
desired level range as they experience each chapter, as
shown in the Suggested Character Levels table.

SUGGESTED CHARACTER LEVELS

Chapter Suggested Level
1. A Friend in Need 1st-2nd

2. Trollskull Alley 2nd

3. Fireball 3rd

4, Dragon Season 3rd—4th

5. Spring Madness Sth or higher

6. Hell of a Summer S5th or higher

7. Maestro's Fall 5th or higher

8. Winter Wizardry 5th or higher

[f you decide to track experience points, you can slow
the rate of advancement by banking XP until you're
ready for the party to level up. Conversely, you can has-
ten level advancement by awarding ad hoc XP for com-
pleting goals, roleplaying well, and surviving or avoiding
deadly traps. Any such award should be no more than

B INTRODUCTION

what the characters would earn for defeating a monster
with a challenge rating equal to their level. For example,
a fair ad hoc award for a party of 2nd-level adventurers
would be 450 XP, which is what the characters would
earn for defeating a challenge rating 2 monster.

If you dispense with XP tracking and allow characters
to gain levels as the adventure progresses, use the Sug-
gested Character Levels table as your guide.

FACTIONS IN WATERDEEP

Various factions have roots in Waterdeep, and any char-
acter with the faction agent background (described in
the Sword Coast Adventurer's Guide) can choose to be-
long to one of the factions described below, provided the
character meets the faction's prerequisites.

If you're using the optional renown rules described in
chapter 1 of the Dungeon Master’s Guide, allow a plaver
whose character has the faction agent background to
roll a d4 to determine that character's renown at the
start of the adventure. See the “Tracking Renown” side-
bar for more information.

Characters of other backgrounds will have opportu-
nities to join a faction later in the adventure. Any such
character must meet a faction’s prerequisites to be eligi-
ble to join it, and the character's starting renown is 0.

Characters who have renown greater than 0 in a fac-
tion can gain its support in times of need by reaching
out to an influential NPC member of that faction. As a
character's renown improves, so does the quality of the
support. A faction might also help non-members who
further its interests. The descriptions of the factions that
follow include suggestions for how support from a fac-
tion can manifest.

You decide the extent to which a faction will assist the
adventurers, based on each faction's perception of how
important or valuable the adventurers are. For example,
if the characters earn Laeral Silverhand’s trust and her
support of them becomes public knowledge, members
of Bregan D'aerthe might aid the characters so that
Jarlaxle Baenre can curry favor with the Open Lord of
Waterdeep.

BREGAN D’AERTHE

A character must be a drow, preferably a male, to join
this faction.

Bregan D'aerthe is a company of mercenaries orig-
inally made up of the much-derided and dishonorable
castaways of destroyed drow houses. The group'’s leader,
Jarlaxle Baenre, is always looking for new members to
fill the ranks, and loyalty is what matters to him most.

Almost all Bregan D'aerthe members are male be-
cause female drow rarely condescend to take orders
from a male. A female drow can earn a place in the
faction by decrying the drow matriarchy and convincing
Jarlaxle that she would be an asset to the brotherhood.
Jarlaxle employs non-drow operatives as well, none of
whom know they're working for him; such individuals
aren't considered members of the facrion.

Bregan D'aerthe is using one of Jarlaxle’s legitimate
business enterprises—the Sea Maidens Faire—as a
front in Waterdeep. The Sea Maidens Faire consists of



@@@ 16 @@@



three carnival ships (the Eyecatcher, the Heartbreaker,
and the Hellraiser) crewed by disguised drow and a host
of non-drow performers (musicians, acrobats, actors,
and the like). The ships’ cargo consists mostly of wagons
and floats that can be hastily assembled and paraded
through the city. The drow use these parades to draw
attention away from their illicit activities.

In the magical guise of a flamboyant [lluskan captain
named Zardoz Zord, Jarlaxle oversees things from the
Eyecatcher, his flagship, and the Scarlet Marpenoth, a
submarine mounted underneath it. He relies on three
drow gunslingers—Fel'rekt Lafeen, Krebbyg Masq'il'yr,
and Soluun Xibrindas—to do most of his dirty work in
the city. For more information on Jarlaxle and his lieu-
tenants, see appendix B.

Bregan D’aerthe is skilled at infiltrating criminal orga-
nizations. Xanathar's drow advisor, Nar’l Xibrindas (see
appendix B), is actually a Bregan D’aerthe spy.

Bregan D’aerthe support comes in these ways:

« The adventurers receive small, unmarked black
pouches of coins from an anonymous source.,

« The adventurers receive an invitation to dine with
Zardoz Zord aboard his flagship, during which Jar-
laxle takes their measure and offers assistance if they
impress him.

« Bregan D’'aerthe members buy off or quietly dispose
of individuals who threaten the adventurers (usually
without asking).

EMERALD ENCLAVE

A character must demonstrate an interest in protecting
nature or the natural order to join the Emerald Enclave.
Druids and rangers are especially welcome.

Waterdeep harbors a few members of the faction,
which seeks to foster harmony between nature and civ-
ilization. Members living in Waterdeep help guard the
city against unnatural threats, including aberrations and
undead. They also watch over the City of the Dead (Wa-
terdeep’s public cemetery) and the city's parks.

Members of the Emerald Enclave can be found in
Phaulkonmere, a noble villa in the Southern Ward, and
at the Snobeedle Orchard and Meadery in Undercliff.

The walls of Phaulkonmere enclose fabulous gardens,
and the buildings are covered with moss and ivy. The
place is owned by descendants of two wealthy families
the Tarms (longtime Waterdavians) and the Phaulkons
(who are of Cormyrean descent), They spend most of the
year traveling abroad and entrust the estate to a half-
elf groundskeeper named Melannor Fellbranch. He is

joined by Jeryth Phaulkon, a noblewoman turned demi-
god who serves Mielikki, divine lady of the forest. ‘] et
The Snobeedle Orchard and Meadery is run by the V’ (oK

Snobeedle family of halflings, among them an old druid
named Blossom Snobeedle. Blossom's youngest son,
Dasher, disappeared in Waterdeep about six months
ago, He was infected with lycanthropy and is now a
member of a wererat gang called the Shard Shunners.



@@@ 17 @@@



Emerald Enclave support comes in these ways:

« Enclave members share information they’ve gathered
from magical conversations with animals in the city.

» Melannor Fellbranch (see “Emerald Enclave,” page
35) provides free food and care for the adventurers’
animals at Phaulkonmere.

+ One adventurer receives a supernatural charm (see
“Supernatural Gifts” in chapter 7 of the Dungeon Mas-
ter’s Guide) bestowed by Jeryth Phaulkon (see “Emer-
ald Enclave,” page 35).

FOrCE GREY

To join Force Grey, one must first become a member of
the Gray Hands. An individual who has served in the
City Watch or the City Guard is eligible to join, as are
characters who are willing to swear oaths to defend
Waterdeep, its citizens, and its laws with their lives. Ad-
venturers who show promise might be invited to join the
Gray Hands, a faction overseen by the Blackstaff, Vajra
Safahr. Members of the Gray Hands complete assign-
ments dictated by Vajra.

Force Grey is an elite cadre of specialized adventur-
ers, drawn from the ranks of the Gray Hands, whose
fighting prowess is matched only by their loyalty to the
city. Force Grey attracts the best of the best. Characters
don't begin their adventuring careers as members of
Force Grey, but they can work up to that status.

Whenever Waterdeep has a problem that can't be
handled by diplomats or the city’s other armed forces,
the Open Lord has the option to mobilize Force Grey.
Such action is usually taken as a last resort, since some
past members of the group have exhibited a tendency to
indulge in wanton violence, causing as much damage as
they ostensibly prevent.

Although the Open Lord sets mission goals and pa-
rameters whenever the unit is activated, the Force Grey
team needed to complete any given assignment is made
up of individuals handpicked by the Blackstalff.

If members of Force Grey (and, in some cases, the
Gray Hands) are arrested for a crime, the Open Lord or
the Blackstaff will usually intervene on their behalf and
facilitate their release.

Force Grey support comes in these ways:

« Adventurers who are arrested are released under the
loose supervision of Vajra Safahr (see appendix B).

« The adventurers receive a helpful uncommon or rare
magic item that they're allowed to use for a time (until
it mysteriously disappears).

+ Meloon Wardragon (see appendix B) or some other re-

spected member of Force Grey helps the adventurers

out of a tough situation.

HARPERS

Any smart, non-evil character can join the Harpers of
.. Waterdeep. Bards and wizards are especially welcome.
Harpers are altruists who work behind the scenes to
keep power out of the hands of evil tyrants. In the cur-

LINTRODUCTION

rent situation, it doesn’t take long for them to suspect
that the Zhentarim is wholly or partially responsible for
the escalation of violence in Waterdeep. Harper spies
might use the adventurers as instruments to get at the
truth. Various nobles and guildmasters in the city are
Harper sympathizers.

The Harpers have several secret gathering places
in Waterdeep, among them Ulbrinter Villa, an estate
located on Delzorin Street between Vhezoar Street
and Brondar's Way, in the North Ward (just south of
Trollskull Alley). The elf lady of the house, Remallia
Haventree (“Remi"” to her friends), the widow of Lord
Arthagast Ulbrinter, is a high-ranking member of the
faction. Other key members include Renaer Neverem-
ber, the estranged son of Lord Dagult Neverember, and
Mirt, an advisor to Open Lord Laeral Silverhand. See
appendix B for more information on these NPCs,

Harpers prefer to conduct their business in bustling
inns and taverns such as the Yawning Portal, or in quiet
locations such as the City of the Dead.

Harper support comes in these ways:

« The Harpers make common and uncommon potions
and scrolls available to the adventurers at a reduced
or deferred cost depending on the circumstances.

« Remallia Haventree (see appendix B) feeds useful bits
of information to the adventurers and might also offer
them temporary shelter.

« If the adventurers are accosted and overwhelmed, one
or moré Harpers come to their rescue. A Harper res-
cue team usually consists of a bard (see appendix B)
or a mage, plus 1d4 + 3 spies or veterans.

[LORDS ALLIANCE

To become a member of the Lords’ Alliance faction in
Waterdeep, a character must be a Waterdavian citizen.
Those with criminal records can also join, provided they
demonstrate their allegiance to the city.

The Lords’ Alliance is a confederation of cities and
towns up and down the Sword Coast and throughout the
North, including (among others) Baldur's Gate, Mirabar,
Mithral Hall, Neverwinter, and Silverymoon. Members
of the alliance must come to one another’s aid in times
of need, and the organization uses field operatives (dip-
lomats, spies, and assassins) to safeguard its interests.

Waterdeep is one of the most influential and invested
members of the Lords’ Alliance. Waterdeep’s Open
Lord, Laeral Silverhand, uses spies to keep tabs on
adventurers in the city, rewarding those who place Wa-
terdeep’s interests above their own. Laeral employs ad-
venturers as agents of the Lords’ Alliance, among them
Jalester Silvermane. See appendix B for more informa-
tion on these NPCs.

Laeral spends most of her time in the Palace of
Waterdeep. Within walking distance of the palace are
well-maintained government residences set aside for
the use of representatives of other Lords’ Alliance cities
and towns.



@@@ 18 @@@



Lords’ Alliance support comes in these ways:

- City Watch officials are notified that the characters
are on “official business” for the Lords' Alliance and
instructed to provide support whenever they can.

« Mirt (see appendix B), a Masked Lord who serves as
Laeral Silverhand's advisor, invites the adventurers
to dinner at his dilapidated mansion as a pretense for
sharing rumors and imparting pearls of wisdom.

« The characters are granted a brief audience with
Laeral Silverhand (see appendix B).

ORDER OF THE GAUNTLET

Any non-evil character can join the Order of the Gaunt-
let in Waterdeep. Clerics, monks, and paladins are
especially welcome, particularly if they worship Helm,
Torm, or Tyr.

The order's mission is to seek out and destroy evil
before it gains a foothold. The surge of violence in Wa-
terdeep spurs members of the order to find adventurers
who can help return peace to the city.

An individual can be a member of the faction and also
a member of the clergy or a Knight pledged to a specific
god or temple. Members of the order act alone or in
small groups. Some are Waterdavian natives; others
hail from distant settlements and have come to the city
on temple business.

Order of the Gauntlet support comes in these ways:

» If the adventurers require healing or other magic, a
member of the order can facilitate meetings with local
priests who worship non-evil deities.

- If the adventurers get in trouble with the law, a mem-
ber of the order puts in a good word for them and
tends to their affairs while they're incarcerated.

+ Hlam (see appendix B) might show up and help the
characters in an impending battle.

XANATHAR GUILD

Anyone can join the Xanathar Guild, which, despite its
name, doesn't have official guild status in Waterdeep.
Before membership is granted, however, an applicant
must pass a test that always involves the perpetration
of a serious crime. Possibilities include murdering a
guild member who has failed Xanathar in some fashion,
kidnapping a Waterdavian citizen, collecting a ransom,
robbing a hire-coach, or looting a warehouse.

Among low-ranking guild members, rampant specu-
lation goes on about the true nature of Xanathar. Few
have any inkling that their boss is a beholder, and fewer
still have seen or spoken to the eye tyrant,

(Given that the faction is fundamentally evil, advance-
ment is based on one’s wiles or one's ability to dispose
of rivals. Competition within the organization is fierce
and often deadly. Evil characters can thrive in this envi-
ronment, but the risks are seldom worth the reward.

Xanathar Guild support comes in these ways:

+ Any member given an assignment might receive a
monstrous bodyguard or assistant (such as a bugbear,
a kenku, or a wererat), who has secret instructions to
kill the guild member if they fail to complete the as-
signment as ordered.

« The guild grants access to secret tunnels and safe
houses (hidden cellars) underneath Waterdeep.

« Xanathar might send a gazer (see appendix B) to help
(and spy on) an up-and-coming guild member.

ZHENTARIM

The Black Network has an open recruitment policy. Any-
one can join. Tenacity and loyalty are highly valued (but
not essential) traits in new members.

The Zhentarim is a shadow organization that trades
mercenaries and goods (including weapons) for profit, It
has long sought to gain political influence in Waterdeep,
but the strength of the city's Masked Lords, nobility, and
professional guilds makes that difficult.

The Zhentarim in Waterdeep is a Iractured organi-
zation. Those who support Manshoon want to destroy
Xanathar and seize political and economic control of the
city. Those who oppose Manshoon want to expose and
destroy him before they are themselves apprehended or
driven out of the city by the local authorities.

Adventurers can't join Manshoon's cause, but they can
join and receive aid from the Zhents who are opposed
to him. The leaders of this branch of the Black Network
are retired adventurers who have become business
entrepreneurs. Their adventuring party was called the
Doom Raiders because their specialty was plundering
lich lairs (which are called “dooms™). They are desper-
ately trying to gain a legitimate economic foothold in
Waterdeep, which requires making alliances with local
guilds and nobles. Manshoon's war against the Xana-
thar Guild has thrown their plans into upheaval.

The Doom Raiders (described in appendix B) con-
sider themselves the true Zhentarim of Waterdeep. The
group’s leaders are Davil Starsong (Master of Opportu-
nities and Negotiations), Istrid Horn (Master of Trade
and Coin), Skeemo Weirdbottle (Master of Magic), Tash-
lyn Yafeera (Master of Arms and Mercenaries), and Ziraj
the Hunter (Master of Assassination).

Zhentarim support comes in these ways:

+ Davil can arrange meetings with influential nobles
and members of city guilds.

+ Adventurers can procure discounted potions and poi-
sons from Skeemo's shop, Weirdbottle's Concoctions,
which is located in the Trades Ward.

+ Tashlyn offers affordable mercenaries, either thugs
costing 2 sp per day each or veterans costing 2 gp
per day each.

+ Istrid offers loans of up to 2,500 gp with an interest
rate of 10 percent per tenday.

« Adventurers can hire Ziraj to assassinate someone, in
return for some undisclosed favor to be called in later.



@@@ 19 @@@



:
[
)



@@@ 20 @@@



L

=
=
T

The 1!-£l"-."-'rlill‘-.__’_' Portal attracts
adventurers from cvery corner
of the Forgotten Realms and the
D& D multiverse. Not sure who
a numbered character is? Go to

page 224 for the answer key.

@@@ 1 @@@



THE YAWNING PORTAL

The Yawning Portal is a famous inn and tavern located
in the Castle Ward of Waterdeep. Adventurers can meet
all sorts of colorful characters here,

The place is a stone building with a slate roof and
several chimneys. Most of the ground floor is taken
up by the tavern's common room, which contains a
40-foot-diameter open well (actually the outer shell of a
sunken stone tower) that descends 140 feet to the first
level of Undermountain, the sprawling dungeon under
Waterdeep. A rope-and-pulley mechanism is used to
lower adventurers into the well and hoist them out. More
information about this entrance to Undermountain can
be found in Warterdeep: Dungeon of the Mad Mage.

The upper floors of the Yawning Portal contain com-
fortable, nicely appointed rooms for guests.

Durnan, the proprietor, charges standard prices for
food, drink, and lodging (see chapter 5 of the Player's
Handbook for costs).

FAMILIAR FACES

Give the Yawning Portal Familiar Faces handout in
appendix C to the players, and allow each of them to
select one NPC as a friendly acquaintance—someone
the playver’s character knows and trusts. More than one
player can select the same NPC, The information below
should be withheld from the players until their charac-
ters learn it.

DURNAN
N male llluskan human innkeeper

The proprietor of the Yawning Portal is a retired adven-
turer and a man of few words, Durnan (see appendix B)
bluntly warns adventurers of lower than 5th level that
entering Undermountain “isn’t a good idea.” He keeps

a magic greatsword hidden behind the bar just in case
something monstrous crawls up out of the entry well.

“BONNIE"
N doppelganger disguised as Tethyrian human barmaid

This doppelganger posing as a friendly barmaid is the
leader of a gang of five doppelgangers that arrived in
Waterdeep over a year ago. To help the gang make ends
meet, she works for Durnan as a barmaid. Mattrim
Mereg (see below) knows her secret.

MATTRIM “THREESTRINGS” MEREG
LG male llluskan human bard

This socially awkward bard (see appendix B) performs
at the Yawning Portal and is a better musician than

he pretends to be. He's called “Threestrings” because
he plays a lute that has only three strings remaining.
His secret is that he's a Harper spy, and he’s far more
eloquent and composed than he lets on. He lives at the
inn, where he spends his afternoons and evenings spy-
ing on Zhentarim agents and gathering information on
other potential troublemakers. He recently befriended
Bonnie and wants to help her doppelganger gang settle
into the city.

R INTRODUCTION

JALESTER SILVERMANE
LG male Chondathan human fighter

Jalester Silvermane (see appendix B) is an agent of the
Lords’ Alliance who reports directly to Laeral Silver-
hand. The Open Lord of Waterdeep has asked him to
spy on adventurers who might, through their actions, aid
or imperil the city and its citizens. Since the Yawning
Portal attracts adventurers of all sorts, Jalester spends a
lot of time here, usually seated by himself in a quiet cor-
ner. Durnan knows that Jalester works for Laeral and
leaves the young man alone.

Jalester is often distracted by thoughts of Faerrel Dun-
blade, his boyfriend, who was killed in a street fight last
vear. When not engaged in alliance business, Jalester is
lonely and looking for love.

MELOON WARDRAGON
NE male Chondathan human adventurer under the
control of an intellect devourer

Meloon Wardragon (see appendix B) comes across as
a cheery, optimistic, warm-hearted man eager to fight
alongside those he considers his friends. The Yawning
Portal staff and many of the regular guests know that
Meloon is a skilled fighter with ties to Force Grey.

An intellect devourer in league with Xanathar ate
Meloon's brain several months ago. Now under the mon-
ster’s control, Meloon actively discourages adventurers
from exploring Undermountain and urges them to focus
on conflicts in the city instead. He also hunts down and
kills Zhentarim operatives for his secret beholder mas-
ter. He has his eye on Davil Starsong (see appendix B)
but won't kill the elf in plain view of witnesses.

OBAYA UDAY
NG female Chultan human priest of Waukeen

Obaya, a priest, has traveled from Chult to sponsor ex-
peditions into Undermountain, with the goal of bringing
its magical treasures back to her employer, the mer-
chant prince Wakanga O'tamu of Port Nyanzaru. She
discourages low-level adventurers from exploring Un-
dermountain but is happy to help them with her magic
until they gain enough experience to be useful to her.

[f yvou plan to run Waterdeep: Dungeon of the Mad
Mage after this adventure, Obaya can take on a more
prominent role as an advisor and a source of quests.

YAGRA STONEFIST
N female halforc thug-for-hire

Yagra is a Black Network mercenary who gets paid to
protect a Zhent negotiator named Davil Starsong (see
appendix B for more information on him). Yagra finds
the job boring and likes to pass the time by challenging
adventurers to arm wrestle. (Resolve such contests
using contested Strength checks.) If the characters
express their opposition to the Xanathar Guild, Yagra
might urge them to speak to Davil about joining forces
with the Zhentarim to destroy the beholder crime lord.

Yagra is a half-orc thug. When reduced to 0 hit points,
she drops to 1 hit point instead (but can’t do this again
until she finishes a long rest). She has darkvision out to
a range of 60 feet, She speaks Common and Orc.



@@@ 2 @@@



BAR BRAWL IN THE YAWNING PORTAL PROVES
that nowhere is safe from the gang war be-
tween the Zhentarim and the Xanathar Guild.
In this atmosphere of danger, the characters
are offered a quest by Volothamp Geddarm.
Volo promises a reward if they can rescue
: his missing friend, Floon Blagmaar, who he
fears has been caught up in the conflict. Volo's
quest is a straightforward introduction to the streets of
Waterdeep, providing the characters with an excuse to
explore the city.

In their hunt for Volo’s friend, the characters might
make allies and enemies who can resurface throughout
the adventure. Following the completion of Volo's quest,
the characters gain a home base with an address in
Trollskull Alley, in Waterdeep’s North Ward. From their
new base, the characters can plot their own course,
whether it involves interacting with Waterdeep's people,
joining one of the city's many factions, or simply poking
around for danger.

WHERE TO START

This adventure assumes that the characters have al-
ready formed a party and are presently in the Yawning
Portal, perhaps knocking back a pint of Shadowdark ale
and wolfing down a plate of quipper and chips. Alterna-
tively, you can begin this adventure as the characters
first enter the raucous tavern, or by having them all meet
for the first time as Volo hands them their initial quest.

TAVERN BRAWL

As the characters are relaxing in the taproom of the
Yawning Portal, a fistfight breaks out. Read the follow-
ing to set the scene:

You sit around a sturdy wooden table lit by a brightly |
burning candle and littered with plates cleared of food
and half-drained tankards. The sounds of gamblers yell-
ing and drunken adventurers singing bawdy songs nearly
drown out the off-key strumming of a young bard three

tables over.

Then all the noise is eclipsed by a shout: “Ya pig! Like
killin’ me mates, does ya?” Then a seven-foot-tall half-
orc is hit by a wild, swinging punch from a male human
whose shaved head is covered with eye-shaped tattoos.
Four other humans stand behind him, ready to jump
into the fray. The half-orc cracks her knuckles, roars, and
leaps at the tattooed figure—but before you can see if
blood is drawn, a crowd of spectators clusters around
the brawl. What do you do?

The human combatants are five members of the Xana-
thar Guild (CE human bandits). The one with the eve-
shaped tattoos on his bald pate is their leader, Krentz.
Their foe, Yagra Strongfist, is a half-orc employed by
the Zhentarim (see the Yawning Portal Friendly Faces
handout in appendix C). Yagra fights for her pride.

CHAPIER 1 | A FRIEND IN NEED



@@@ 3 @@@



GETTING INVOLVED

If the characters choose to join the fray, have everyone
roll initiative. But the fight is almost over by the time
they push through the rowdy spectators. Krentz has
only 3 hit points remaining and is trying to escape from
underneath Yagra, but the four other Xanathar Guild
members are poised to tackle her.

Pulling Yagra away from Krentz requires a successful
Strength check contested by Yagra's Strength check.
Yagra thanks the characters if they help her, but is disap-
pointed that they interfered in the fight.

Remember how the characters deal with Krentz in
this scene. If he survives, the characters might meet him
again in one of the Xanathar Guild's sewer hideouts (see
area Q5, page 28).

HANGING BAcCK

If the characters don't interfere in the brawl, Yagra
knocks Krentz out cold but is then beaten unconscious
by his companions. Durnan, the proprietor of the Yawn-
ing Portal, points toward the door. “Out!” he snarls, and
the Xanathar Guild members flee carrying Krentz's un-
conscious form.

TROLL AND FRIENDS

In the third round of the brawl, trouble arises from out
of the gaping well in the middle of the Yawning Por-

tal's taproom:

' ’
Shouts of alarm suddenly ring out as a hulking creature
climbs up out of the shaft in the middle of the tap-
room—a monster with warty green skin, a tangled nest
of wiry black hair, a long, carrot-shaped nose, and blood-
shot eyes. As it bares its yellow teeth and howls, you can
see that a half-dozen bat-like creatures are attached to its
body, with three more circling above it like flies. Everyone
in the tavern reacts in fear except for the barkeep,

Durnan, who shouts, “Troll!"
[ 1 L]

The troll, which currently has 44 hit points, has crawled
up from the first level of Undermountain to feed on tasty
humanoid flesh, bringing nine stirges with it. Once in
the taproom, the troll rises to its full height of 9 feet
and rolls initiative. The stirges also roll initiative, but
only the three flying above the troll pose a threat. The
remaining stirges are bloated, having drained copious
amounts of the troll's blood, and fly back down the shaft
to digest their meal. As the troll regenerates, the effects
of its blood loss become less apparent.

Most tavern patrons and staffers flee or take cover
at the sight of the troll. The stirges attack the nearest
characters as Durnan (see appendix B) draws his great-
sword, springs over the bar, and confronts the monster
himself. As he attacks, he calls on the characters to
focus on slaying the stirges and then douse the troll
with lamp oil and set it on fire when it falls. Yagra joins
the fight if she's conscious. To any characters who help
defeat the troll, Durnan says matter-of-factly, “You
~ fought well.”

[f any of the characters are reduced to 0 hit points
during the fight, employees of the Yawning Portal step
forward to stabilize them.

MEETING VOLO

Once the troll and the stirges are dealt with, Volo
pushes against the tide of patrons staying clear of the
monster to greet the characters, lavishing praise on
them for their bravery (whether justified or not): “You be
adventurers, am I right? I could use your help. Let’s find
a table to talk, shall we?”

Volothamp Geddarm is known to most Waterdavians
as a braggart and a notorious embellisher of facts. For
all his faults, though, Volo is a soft-hearted sort who
cares for nothing as much as his friends. At present,
he is grievously concerned for the well-being of one of
them. He begins his request with an air of charm and
mystery, but it quickly devolves into tearful sincerity.

¢ 1
The figure who approached you strokes his mustache,
adjusts his floppy hat, and tightens his scarf. “Volothamp
Geddarm, chronicler, wizard, and celebrity, at your
service. | trust you've noted the violence in our fair city
these past tendays. | haven't seen so much blood since
my last visit to Baldur's Gate! But now | fear | have mis-

placed a friend amid this odious malevolence.

“My friend's name is Floon Blagmaar. He's got more
beauty than brains, and | worry he took a bad way home
a couple nights ago and was kidnapped—or worse. If you
agree to track him down with all due haste, | can offer
you ten dragons apiece now, and | can give you each ten

times that when you find Floon. May | prevail upon you in

my hour of need?”
& L]

Volo gives each character a small pouch containing 10
gp simply for accepting his quest. Characters who want
to discover his intentions must make a DC 10 Wisdom
(Insight) check. On a success, a character discerns that
Volo is honest but might be stretching the truth about
how much he can pay. (Currently low on cash, Volo is
awaiting royalty payments from Volo's Guide to Mon-
sters. To make more coin, he began work on a new book,
Volo's Guide to Spirits and Specters, As it happens, his
knowledge of spirits mostly concerns the alcoholic vari-
ety, and the writing has not been going well.) If pressed,
Volo urges the characters to trust him, and promises
he'll have the rest of the reward, 100 gp per character,
ready to deliver once Floon is returned to him alive.
Volo describes Floon as a handsome human male
in his early thirties with wavy red-blond hair. He was
dressed in princely garb when Volo last saw him. Two
nights ago, before Floon disappeared, he and Volo were
drinking and merrymaking at the Skewered Dragon, a
dark, bawdy tavern in the Dock Ward. Volo recommends
that the characters start their search there,



@@@ 4 @@@



WHAT HAPPENED THAT NIGHT?

Volo is embarrassed to admit he might have gotten his
friend Floon in trouble, and he resists providing all the
details of what happened the night Floon disappeared.

Beset by writer’s block, Volo met Floon Blagmaar for
drinks at the Skewered Dragon two nights ago. They
drank and gambled for a few hours, and then Volo left.
That's the last he saw of Floon.

Unbeknownst to Volo, not long after he departed, a
drunken Floon met another acquaintance, Lord Ren-
aer Neverember, at the tavern. The two left together,
with Renaer offering to walk Floon home. Five Zhen-
tarim thugs working for Urstul Floxin (see appendix
B) jumped both Floon and Renaer. They took them to
a warehouse in the Dock Ward, so they could question
Renaer—the son of Lord Dagult Neverember—about
the whereabouts of the Stone of Golorr and his father's
hidden cache of dragons. Before the interrogation could
begin, members of the Xanathar Guild ambushed and
killed the Zhent guards in the warehouse. The new
arrivals mistook Floon for Renaer, knocked Floon un-
conscious, and dragged him away while Renaer hid and
escaped their notice,

Floon was taken to a Xanathar Guild hideout in the
sewers. A small gang of kenku was left behind at the
Zhentarim warehouse to kill any other Zhents who
might show up at the warehouse. The presence of the
kenku has prevented Renaer from trying to leave the
warehouse.

FINDING FLOON

Volo last saw Floon outside the Skewered Dragon, a
dubious (and Zhentarim-owned) tavern between Net
Street and Fillet Lane in the Dock Ward. The following
encounters kick off the characters’ investigation.

En route to the tavern, “Blood in the Streets” is a
chance for characters to see the City Watch in action.
If the characters decide to look around, “Searching the
Dock Ward” gives them a feel for their surroundings,
and they might discover a strange place, “Old Xoblob
Shop,” that warrants further exploration. Once they ar-
rive at their destination, “The Skewered Dragon” is an
opportunity for the characters to get information from
the patrons, which leads them to “Candle Lane,” where
their quest continues,

BLOOD IN THE STREETS

As the characters travel through the Dock Ward, they
come upon the aftermath of a bloody clash between the
Xanathar Guild and the Zhentarim:

s -
As you turn a corner, you find yourselves on a street that
has been cordoned off by the City Watch. Lying on the
cobblestones are a half-dozen corpses, seemingly the
victims of some terrible skirmish. Watch officers have
disarmed and arrested three blood-drenched humans
and are in the midst of questioning witnesses. One of
the officers sees you. “Cet on,” she says. “Nothing to
see here.”

The skirmish that occurred here has nothing to do with
Floon's disappearance but represents an escalation in
the conflict between the Zhentarim and the Xanathar
Guild. A dozen guards of the City Watch have arrested
three bandits and are questioning witnesses while
waiting for wagons to take away the eriminals and

the corpses. The survivors of the skirmish have been
stripped of their weapons and forced to kneel with their
hands on their heads. All three, loyal Zhentarim agents
(employed by Urstul Floxin; see appendix B), are likely
to be accused of murder. They coldly catch the eve of
anyone who passes by, but the City Watch won't let the
characters anywhere near the prisoners.

SEARCHING THE Dock WARD

The Dock Ward is unsafe. You can set the mood by read-
ing the following to the plavers:

' i
Tall, densely packed tenements leave most of the
neighborhood in shadow at ground level. Most of the
streetlamps have had their glass smashed and their

candles stolen, and the smells of salt air and excrement

linger as you pass by rows of run-down buildings.
! 4

On the corner of Zastrow Street and Fillet Lane is a
shop with a peculiar window display:

B '
One nearby shop stands out from the others. It has a
deep purple facade, and in its window hangs a stuffed
beholder, Above the door hangs a sign whose elaborate

letters spell out “Qld Xoblob Shop.”
B P

If the characters check out the shop, continue with “Old
Xoblob Shop.” If they don't, they find the tavern without
further incident; see “The Skewered Dragon™ below.

OLDp XOBLOB SHOP
When the characters enter, they quickly get a sense of
the strangeness of the place:

7 [
A cloud of lavender-scented purple smoke trails out of
the shop's door as you peer inside. Every wall is painted
purple, and every dusty knickknack on the shelves is
dyed a deep violet. The hairless cld gnome sitting cross-
legged on the counter wears plum-colaored robes. His
cheeks are decorated with nine purple face-painted eyes.

The gnome lowers a pipe and exhales a cloud of lav-
ender smoke before raising a hand. “Hail and well met!
Come browse the shelves of the most curious curiosity
shop in the world!"

s

The shop is named after the stuffed beholder in the win-
dow—a fixture that is actually a magical sensor, through
which Xanathar can peer whenever it wishes.

The shapkeeper is a wizened deep gnome who spies
for the Xanathar Guild. A few years ago, he survived

CHAPTER 1 | A FRIEND IN NEED &



@@@ 5 @@@



the detonation of a gas spore in Undermountain and
inherited some stray beholder memories. Driven by a
compulsion to carve out his own domain, the gnome
settled in Waterdeep, bought the Old Xoblob Shop from
its previous owner, and tried renaming it after himself,
yet everyone kept calling it the Old Xoblob Shop. He
therefore restored the old name and changed his name
to Xoblob. “No relation to the eye tyrant hanging in the
window!” he says.

Trinkets. The gnome sells an assortment of trinkets.
As the characters search the shelves, roll on the Trin-
kets table in chapter 5 of the Player's Handbook to de-
termine what catches their eye. Xoblob sells any trinket
for 1d6 gp.

Floon’'s Fate. The gnome doesn’t know Floon by
name, but he recognizes his description. He is reluctant
to share information, but offering him a new purple
item or succeeding on a DC 13 Charisma (Intimidation
or Persuasion) check loosens his tongue. He says that
Floon and a well-dressed fellow of similar appearance
and bearing (Renaer Neverember, though the gnome
doesn’t know his name and didn’t recognize him) were
jumped outside the shop by rough-looking men in black
leather armor. Xoblob thinks there were five attackers,
but none of them looked familiar. One of them had a
black tattoo of a winged snake on his neck.

THE SKEWERED DRAGON

The Skewered Dragon faces an alley that runs between
Net Street and Fillet Lane in the Dock Ward, not far
from the Old Xoblob Shop. When the characters ap-

proach it, read:

» ’

The Skewered Dragon looks like a ruin. Both of its
front-facing windows are smashed, and a ship's anchor is
lodged in the roof. Through the windows, you can see a
group of haggard patrons drinking from huge tankards.

Floon has not been at the Skewered Dragon since the
night of his disappearance, and the dive's dockworker
patrons are loath to talk to strangers. A bribe or a suc-
cessful DC 13 Charisma (Intimidation or Persuasion)
check gets them to open up.

Floon's Fate. Several of the regulars remember see-
ing Volo and Floon drinking together a couple of nights
ago. After Volo left, Floon stuck around long enough to
meet with another friend: Renaer Neverember, the son
of Waterdeep's previous Open Lord, Dagult Neverember.
“Chip off the old block, that one!” sneers one patron.
“lust another spailed, rich noble who likes to rub our
noses in it!” says another.

The two drank and played a few rounds of Three-
Dragon Ante before leaving around midnight. Five men
followed them out, and no one in the tavern knows what
., happened after that. The men who left shortly after
Floon and Renaer haven't returned to the tavern since,
but they're known to frequent a warehouse on Candle
Lane. “Look for the snake symbol on the door,” says one
of the tavern regulars,

! |

CANDLE LANE

The buildings on either side of Candle Lane are so tall
and so tightly packed together that light touches the
street only at highsun.

T [
Gloom envelops a narrow alley as dark as a dungeon—
and as odorous as one, too. Nearly all the streetlamps
have been smashed. The only light that pierces the
darkness is a faint flickering from down the lane, like a

distant candle.
: :

The flickering comes from the one streetlamp still intact
on Candle Lane, kept alight by a continual lame spell.

A warehouse is directly across the street from the lamp,
which illuminates a black winged snake (the symbol of
the Zhentarim) painted above the door’s handle. Char-
acters who have ties to the Zhentarim recognize the
symbol, while others can recall its significance with a
successful DC 10 Intelligence check.

ZHENTARIM HIDEOUT

The hideout on Castle Lane (see map 1.1) is a ram-
shackle two-story warehouse. The Black Network has
other sanctuaries in run-down buildings like this one
throughout Waterdeep (meaning that the floor plan of
this locale can be reused for other Zhent hideouts).

The warehouse stands at the back of an outer yard be-
hind a high fence, The gate on the fence isn't locked. The
building's three points of entry—a front door, a large
warehouse loading door, and a painted-over window—
are locked. The front door has a sliding peephole that
can be opened from the inside. Either of the doors or
the window can be unlocked by a character who makes
a successful DC 12 Dexterity check using thieves' tools,
or can be forced open with a successful DC 10 Strength
(Athletics) check.

Knocking at the doors or the window alerts a group of
kenku inside that someone 1s coming. The kenku scram-
ble to hide behind toppled furniture, making a ruckus
that any character who has a passive Wisdom (Percep-
tion) score of 16 or higher can hear. These kenku are all
that remain of the Xanathar Guild force that murdered
almost everyone in the warehouse after the five Zhen-
tarim thugs captured Renaer Neverember and Floon
Blagmaar and brought them here. Floon was taken
away, but Renaer succeeded in staying alive by hiding.
Now, the young noble is trying to figure out how to slip
past the kenku, who are lazily searching the warehouse
for loot while waiting to see if any more Zhents show up.

Ll. MAIN ROOM

The Black Network’s main business is recruiting,
training, and equipping sellswords. Crates packed with
weapons, rations, boots, black uniforms, and other gear
fill the warehouse.

When the characters try to enter, determine if the four
kenku inside are aware of their presence before reading
the boxed text.



@@@ 6 @@@



ol

=

A character with thieves' tools can pick the lock on a
door or the window with a successful DC 10 Dexterity
check. Characters who enter quietly can try to catch the
kenku by surprise. If the characters knock before en-
tering or announce their arrival in some other way, the
kenku hide as described above.

Tables and chairs have been carelessly tossed across the
floor. The corpses of a dozen men lie along the walls,
their rapiers and daggers lying nearby. On the north side

of the area, stairs rise to an open level above.

If the kenku aren't hidden, add:

Four short, avian creatures with long beaks and black
feathers look over in surprise from where they stand in
the middle of the warehouse. Each wears a hooded cloak

and wields a shortsword.

The corpses belong to five human Zhentarim sellswords
(the same ones who kidnapped Floon and Renaer) and
seven human Xanathar Guild thugs, all of them clad in
leather armor. Each Zhent has a black tattoo of a winged
snake on his neck or forearm, and one of the Xanathar
Guild members has a black tattoo on the palm of his
right hand that looks like a circle with ten spokes radiat-
ing out from its circumference (the symbol of Xanathar).
The kenku fight until two of them are incapacitated or
killed, whereupon the survivors try to flee. A successful

DC 10 Charisma (Intimidation) check forces captured
kenku to divulge what they know.

WHAT THE KENKU KNOW

When kenku speak, they mimic sounds and voices they
have heard before. Under interrogation, they repeat the
following phrases:

« In a deep voice with an orcish accent: “Xanathar
sends its regards.”

« In a thin, nasally voice: “Tie up the pretty boy in the
back room!” and “Follow the yellow signs in the sew-
ers.” (This remark refers to tunnels in the sewers that
are marked with Xanathar's symbol where they lead
to the Xanathar Guild hideout.)

« In a scratchy voice: “No time to loot the place. Just get
him to the boss.”

Z2. STORAGE CLOSET

The door to this back room hangs loosely on broken
hinges. The cramped chamber beyond smells strongly
of sour fish and vinegar. It is filled with discarded ropes,
canvas tarpaulins, and splintered wood from smashed
barrels. Renaer Neverember (see appendix B) is hiding
here, having slipped free of his rope bonds. The charac-
ters can hear his ragged breathing coming from under a
tarpaulin at the north end of the room.

ROLEPLAYING RENAER

Renaer is unarmed. Marred by grime and the lingering
stench of rancid pickled herring, he speaks with grace
and articulation, as befits his noble upbringing. His trust
1S easily gained but impossible to restore once broken.



@@@ 7 @@@



e o

AR

—_
—

| Lower Level (Yard Level)
: Q

# | -
.

S U P P P

L 2k i Rl o
¥
¥

@ @ @ @ # 0 & F = & 8 B

L]
. i
3
|
LY

Sawe® a8 & B9 § &N T T T T R

Map 1.1 ZueEnTARIM Hineour (Dock Warp)

On the night of the abduction, Renaer was concerned
that Floon was too intoxicated to find his way home by
himself and offered to escort him. The two were jumped

by five thugs as they left Fillet Lane and headed north on
Zastrow Street.

Renaer feels guilty that Floon was taken, since he be-
lieves (correctly) that they mistook Floon for him. If the
characters ask Renaer to join their search for Floon, he
agrees to do so, arming himself with a dagger and a ra-
pier scavenged from the dead Zhents in the warehouse.

If a character asks Renaer why the Zhents kidnapped
him, he gives the following truthful reply:

“The Zhentarim thinks that my father embezzled a large
amount of gold while he was Open Lord, and that he

hid the dragons somewhere in the city. They think they
can find it by using an artifact called the Stone of Golorr,
which was in the hands of the Xanathar Guild until re-
cently. Apparently, someone stole it. The Zhents thought
| knew something about all of this, but | don't. My father
and | haven’t spoken in years.”

- Sy lf - -
v 7 - N 0 —~aty, 0

1 square = 5 feet

IS 1

Z3. SECRET Room

This room is hidden behind a secret door that can be
found with a successful DC 15 Wisdom (Perception)
check. When the secret door is opened, the characters
can hear the faint sound of a bell ringing in the offices
~ above them (area Z5).

CHAPTER 1 | A FRIEND IN NEED

Upper Level §
(Street Level) E

e e T B

i 0 B il 8 TR

PRt ied T

[

ol b SR E B SPE FEFESFEET,
d .
-
'
r
r
:
:‘ a2
el et - e
“‘
1
i
i
’

i T T

T e T RN
i

S A Al i i S i

TREASURE
The Zhents have stashed two wooden crates here. The
first, stolen from the docks, contains four wood-framed
paintings wrapped in leather. The paintings depict
the cities of Luskan, Neverwinter, Silverymoon, and
Baldur’s Gate and are worth 75 gp each,

The second crate, stolen from a caravan on the High
Road, contains fifteen 10-pound silver trade bars, all
black from corrosion but still worth 50 gp each.

4. BALCONY

The open second level is stacked with crates where it
overlooks the main warehouse. Characters who search
through the crates find all sorts of junk, including moth-
eaten bolts of cloth, bottles of spoiled olive oil, and hun-
dreds of pairs of wooden-soled sandals that were all the
rage last summer but are now out of fashion. None of
this junk is valuable.

Z5. OFFICES

The upper floor contains a suite of offices that get little
use by the Zhents. The rooms have desks, chairs, and
bare shelves covered with dust and draped in cobwebs.
Harmless rats skitter about.

Mounted above each office door is a steel alarm bell.
The bells are connected by wires to the secret door in
area Z3, and they ring loudly when that door is opened.

TREASURE

A character who searches the offices finds an unused
paper bird (see appendix A).



@@@ 8 @@@



THE WATCH ARRIVES

Shortly after the characters find Renaer, a captain of the
City Watch named Hyustus Staget (LG male llluskan
human veteran) leads a dozen veterans to the ware-
house. Having received a report of suspicious activity,
they barge in and try to prevent anyone from leaving.
Kenku that are still alive and present are taken into
custody, and it doesn't take long for the City Warch to
conclude that the dead men are members of the Zhen-
tarim and the Xanathar Guild, since violent encounters
between the two factions are becoming ever more fre-
quent. While his constables search the warehouse, Cap-
tain Staget questions the characters,

Captain Staget is an uptight man who helps keep the
peace in the Dock Ward. Every shopkeeper, guild mem-
ber, innkeeper, and tavern keeper in the Dock Ward
knows him, and most respect him regardless of their
opinions of the City Watch in general. Staget doesn’t
believe in rumors or gossip, he doesn't drink, and he
doesn't let anger get the better of him. His job is to curb
the violence in the Dock Ward, but he has been dragging
his heels. After all, he reasons, if the Xanathar Guild
and the Zhentarim want to destroy each other, why
not let them?

Staget once had the warehouse under surveillance,
but elected to pull the detail to bolster patrols through-
out the Dock Ward-—a decision he now regrets. That sur-
veillance was part of an attempt to catch a known Zhent
instigator named Urstul Floxin, a “big fish" rumored
to be responsible for much of the recent strife. Staget
doesn't share this information with strangers.

Staget and Renaer recognize each other, though they
aren't well acquainted. The involvement of a Neverem-
ber noble prompts the captain to be on his best behavior.
He is prepared to overlook any crimes committed by the
characters as long as Renaer is with them, but he gives
them a folded sheet of parchment with the Code Legal
written on it and encourages them to read it. (Give the
players a copy of the Code Legal handout in appendix C,
if vou haven't done so already.)

If the characters ask for the Watch'’s help in locating
Floon, Staget makes it clear that he won’t send a force
into the sewers in search of someone who might well
be a Zhent or Xanathar Guild spy. If they appear intent
on involving themselves further in the conflict between
the Zhentarim and the Xanathar Guild, Staget imparts
some free advice before letting them go:

+ “Best not to meddle in criminal matters. Leave this
dirty business to the City Watch.”

« “Not all City Watch officers are as nice as me.”

+ “Keep the blood oft the streets, okay?” (This is a
common saying among City Watch officials, who care
more about what happens in the city above than what
happens in the sewers below.)

Characters who stir up trouble in the Dock Ward are
likely to run into Captain Staget again. Though he is
secretly pleased to have adventurers doing some of his
work for him, he can't let them overshadow his own
efforts to keep the peace without risking a reprimand
from his superiors.

T L

TRACKING FLOON

At this point, the characters likely know that Floon was
kidnapped by Xanathar Guild members who mistook
him for Renaer Neverember, and that he was taken to a
hideout in the sewers. If the characters didn't learn from
the kenku where Floon was taken, asking questions of
the locals can reveal that many people saw him being
dragged off. A successful DC 15 Intelligence (Investi-
gation) check or 5 gp in bribes allows the characters

to trace the kidnappers' path through back alleys to a
circular metal cover inset in the pavement, The cover is
easily lifted, revealing a ladder down into the sewers.

NAVIGATING THE SEWERS

The sewers have no natural light. Characters without
darkvision need light sources to see.

A putrid stream flows along this sewer tunnel, which
leads in two directions. In one direction, you see a tiny
symbol drawn on the wall in yellow chalk: a palm-sized
circle with ten equidistant spokes radiating out from its
circumference.

& -

The hideout of the Xanathar Guild operatives who
snatched up Floon is deep in the city's labyrinthine sew-
ers. At every location where characters must make a de-
cision about which direction to go, a symbol scrawled in
yvellow chalk—a stylized representation of Xanathar—is
marked next to the tunnel that leads in the right direc-
tion. The symbols are erased by members of the Xana-
thar Guild or the Dungsweepers' Guild every few days,
but these markings have yet to be removed.

GAZER GUARD
Before arriving at the Xanathar Guild hideout, the char-
acters have an encounter in the sewers:

After an hour of following signs through the tunnels,
you come to a three-way intersection where a ladder
leads up into a stone shaft capped by a circular metal
cover. One of the familiar chalk symbols is marked on a
wall nearby, and floating near the symbol is a spherical,
grapefruit-sized creature with a bulging central eye and
four stumpy eyestalks. It bares its teeth at you.

A hostile gazer (see appendix B) that is in league with
Grum'shar, the local Xanathar Guild boss, guards this
intersection. Once the characters defeat it, they can
press on, following the corridor where the chalk symbol

is located: they reach the hideout after following the cor-
rect tunnel for 5 minutes.

Ladder. Characters who climb the ladder and push
open the metal cover find themselves in the cellar of the
Spouting Fish, a tavern in the Dock Ward,

CHAPTER 1 | A FRIEND IN NEED 3



@@@ 9 @@@



XANATHAR GuiLD HIDEOUT

The Xanathar Guild has hideouts throughout Water-
deep’s sewers. The floor plan of this locale (see map 1.2)
can be reused for other hideouts.

The boss of this hideout is a half-orec named
Grum'shar. When the characters arrive, Grum'shar is
interrogating Floon Blagmaar in area Q7. His display of
torture techniques is a ploy to impress his other guest: a
mind flayer named Nihiloor (see appendix B).

All the doors in the hideout are unlocked. Grum'shar
assumes that only those who have guild business will be
able to find their way here.

Ql. CENTRAL HUB

The characters approach this area from the east, slog-
ging through 1-foot-deep water and sewage.

The main sewer tunnel expands into a circular hub with

a pair of arrow slits carved into its outer walls, directly
across from each other. Two passages continue on to the
north and south. A stone door is set into the back wall of

a stone ledge to the west.
. -

If the characters talk loudly or otherwise make a lot of
noise here, the goblin sentries in areas (Q2a and Q2b
awaken and shoot arrows at them through the arrow
slits. The slits provide the goblins with three-quar-
ters cover.

SECRET DOOR
A secret door in the wall of the tunnel that leads south

can be found with a successful DC 15 Wisdom (Percep-
tion) check.

Q2. WATCH POSTS

Two goblins are stationed here, one in area Q2a and
one in Q2b. Allies of the Xanathar Guild, they came here
from Undermountain. The goblins rely on darkvision

to see and are supposed to be watching area Q1, but
both have dozed off, Characters who succeed on a DC

9 Dexterity (Stealth) check can sneak past the sleeping
goblins without waking them.

TREASURE
Each goblin carries 1d6 cp in a small pouch.

Q3. MEssy Room

Rusty weapons and threadbare clothing litter the floor
of this area, which serves as a coat room and armory. It
contains nothing of value.

Q4. EMPTY SLEEPING AREA

., This room contains six tattered, straw-stuffed mat-
‘tresses and nothing of value. If the occupant or occu-
pants of area Q5 have not been dealt with already, the
characters hear the sounds of activity in that room
through the thin wooden door that separates these
two chambers.

CHAPTER 1 | A FRIEND IN NEED

_QS. SLEEPING AREA

This room contains six tattered, straw-stuffed mat-
tresses and a hostile member of the Xanathar Guild,

a duergar named Zemk. If Krentz (CE human bandit)
escaped from the Yawning Portal after the tavern brawl
that kicked off the adventure, he's here as well.

When the characters arrive, Zemk is using pieces of
furniture to barricade the door to area Q6. If Krentz is
here, he’s trying to explain that Zemk's approach won't
work, and is telling him to plug the gap at the bottom of
the door with blankets. Neither of them notices intrud-
ers right away unless the interlopers make a lot of noise.

Once combat starts, Zemk fights to the death. How
Krentz reacts to the adventurers depends on how they
treated him earlier. If they helped him, he gives them a
chance to leave in peace, but he fights alongside Zemk if
they refuse to withdraw. If the duergar is killed, Krentz
flees if he can or surrenders if he must.

Neither Zemk nor Krentz carries any treasure. Both
report to Grum'shar (see area Q7).

Q6. LAVATORY

This room has a hole in the floor that opens into a cess-
pit. A gray ooze has emerged from the pit and killed

two goblins that were sent into the room to dispose of it.
The goblins’ bones float amid the ooze's gooey form, and
their pitted weapons lie on the floor nearby. None of the
gear is salvageable,

Q7. Boss FIGHT

N "
Threadbare curtains hang on the east wall of a long

hall, in the middle of which a muscular half-orc in dingy
robes stands with his foot on the chest of a male human
with wavy red-blond hair. Fire burns around the orc's
clenched fist, and his victim cries and squirms helplessly
beneath him.

Seated on a raised platform to the south is a nightmar-
ish figure wearing black robes. It has large white eyes and
rubbery purple skin, with four tentacles encircling its in-
human mouth. It cradles and gently caresses what looks
like a disembodied brain with feet.

The tentacled creature is Nihiloor (see appendix B), a
mind flayer that is caressing an intellect devourer.
Upon seeing the adventurers, Nihiloor rises from the
stone chair, sets its pet down, and glides across the
room, intending to leave through the double door in the
west wall. The mind flayer expects Grum’'shar and the
intellect devourer to cover its escape.

Nihiloor carries a 3-inch-diameter stone orb carved
to resemble an eyeball, similar to what one might see
at the end of a beholder’s eyestalk. This stone eye is the
key to activating the magic portal in area Q11. The mind
flayer uses it to return to Xanathar's lair (described in
chapter 3). It uses dominate monster to control some-
one who gets in its way and turns any such individuals
against their allies.



@@@ 10 @@@



AT [ ALY

(] ‘.‘" T “'

e
" ".. -

SR

Map 1.2: XanaTHaRr GuiLe Hinsour (SourHern Wanrp)

i | S i i S T e Wl ki -l

The half-orc is Grum’shar, a low-end Xanathar Guild
boss. As soon as his minions retrieved who they thought
was Renaer Neverember, the half-ore begged Nihiloor
let him witness the interrogation of the captive, not real-
izing until after he did so that he had mistaken the pris-
oner’s identity. Grum’shar attacks the characters in the
hope of salvaging his reputation. He is an apprentice
wizard (see appendix B), with these changes:

« Grum'shar is chaotic evil.

» He has these racial traits: When reduced to 0 hit
points, he drops to 1 hit point instead (but can't do this
again until he finishes a long rest), He has darkvision
out to a range of 60 feet. He speaks Common and Orc,

ROLEPLAYING FLOON

As a result of Grum'shar’s torture, Floon Blagmaar (see
appendix B) has 1 hit point left. If he is healed by the
characters, he is eternally grateful and shows his affec-
tion by hugging them. He stays close to them, trusting in
their ability to protect him. If Renaer is with the party,
he can shoulder the burden of protecting Floon.

TREASURE

In a satchel, Grum’'shar carries his spellbook, which

contains the following spells: burning hands, disguise

self, false life, shield, unseen servant, and witch bolt.
Tucked behind the stone chair is a small, unlocked

wooden chest containing two potions of healing, 16 gp,

82 sp, and 250 cp.

s

] bz

IS,

e _—

i s = %
i BTN e sy g B i "“""W

Q8. GETAWAY PASSAGE

This room looks empty, but a thorough search accompa-
nied by a successful DC 10 Wisdom (Perception) check
reveals a rough-hewn tunnel hidden beneath a loose
flagstone. The low tunnel leads north to area Q9.

_— iy - M

Q9. PrRIVATE CELLAR

An innocent halfling family, the Peabodys, brews beer
in this cellar, which lies beneath their home on Fishgut
Alley in the Dock Ward. Their cellar contains brewing
supplies and lots of worthless clutter.

The haiflings haven't noticed the secret tunnel that
leads to the Xanathar Guild hideout; it's concealed be-
neath a large flagstone that requires a Strength score of
10 or higher to be lifted.

DEVELOPMENT

If the characters ascend out of the cellar and enter .
the Peabodys’ small house, the halflings are initially -
alarmed but can be easily calmed. Upon learning of the
secret trapdoor, they vow to seal it up again but allow
the characters to make use of it if the need arises.

Q10. SLEEPING QUARTERS

Straw pallets lie on the floor, and rusty manacles are
bolted to the walls.

Ql11. BAck Door

This hideout contains a secret route to Xanathar's lair.

CHAPTER 1 | A FRIEND IN NEED



@@@ 11 @@@



In the middle of this otherwise empty room is a stone
pillar carved with a small symbol: a perfect circle with
ten equidistant spokes radiating outward from its cir-
cumference. In the middle of this circle is a smaller cir-
cular indentation that bears a passing resemblance to a
lidless eye.

If the stone eye in Nihiloor's possession is pressed into
the circular indentation, an opaque black doorway mag-
ically opens in the south wall. The opening is 8 feet tall
and 4 feet wide. Any creature that passes through it ap-
pears in area X22 of Xanathar's lair (see chapter 5). The
door is a one-way portal, and it closes again 1 minute
after the stone eye is removed from the pillar.

NOT-S0-SECRET DOOR
The secret door is plainly visible to anyone who ap-
proaches it from the east.

12, HosTEL CELLAR

A narrow passage leads to the cellar of a halfling-owned
hostel on Spices Street in the Dock Ward. Medium char-

acters must squeeze to reach this area from the tunnel.
The hostel is used as a base by the Shard Shunners, a
gang of halfling wererats. They are aware of the Xana-

thar Guild hideout, and the two gangs are tenuous allies.

Roscoe Underbough, a Shard Shunner in hybrid form,
guards the cellar. He hides in the northwest storeroom,
ready to jump out and scare away anyone who heads for
the stairs. Not eager to commit murder, Roscoe allows
retreating characters to flee back to the sewers. He is a
wererat, with these changes:

» Roscoe is Small and has 27 (6d6 + 6) hit points.

+ He has these racial traits: He can move through the
space of a Medium or larger creature. He has ad-
vantage on saving throws against being frightened.
He speaks Common and Halfling, and he knows
thieves' cant.

DEVELOPMENT

If the characters defeat Roscoe or slip past him, they
can make their way up into the hostel, which caterstoa
mostly halfling clientele. With none of the other Shard
Shunners currently present, the characters are greeted
warmly by staff and patrons, who point them in the di-
rection of the nearest bathhouse.

COMPLETING VOLO'S QUEST

Returning to the Yawning Portal with Floon Blagmaar
in tow marks the end of this introductory quest. All that
remains is for the characters to collect their reward.

- REWARDS

Volo is drinking alone in the Yawning Portal while anx-
iously awaiting news of Floon's fate. He springs up and
runs to embrace the characters and his friend as soon
as he sees them.

CHAPTER 1 | A FRIEND IN NEED

A Goop DEED
[f the characters reunite Volo with Floon, Volo gives
them a rather sheepish look as he explains their reward:

L | L]
“I confess that | have but few coins to spare. But never
let it be said that Volo reneges on a promise. Allow me to
present something much more valuable.” He holds out

a scroll tube. “The deed to a remarkable property here in
Waterdeep! We'll need a magistrate to witness the trans-
fer of ownership. I'll arrange a meeting with one after

you've inspected the estate and deemed it satisfactory.”
] [

The tube contains a deed to Trollskull Manor, a historic
building in the North Ward that the characters can
claim as a home base, The deed has been notarized and
appears legitimate (because it i8). Volo recently bought
the property because it is rumored to be haunted, and he
was hoping that investigating it might vield a chapter for
his next book, Volo's Guide to Spirits and Specters.

[f the characters accept their reward, Volo sets up a
meeting with a tiefling magistrate named Kylynne Sil-
merhelve. The brief session takes place at a courthouse
in the Castle Ward at highsun. Magistrate Silmerhelve
witnesses the transfer of the deed, rendering the new
ownership official, with the impatience of one who has
more important matters to attend to. She also collects
an estate transfer tax of 25 gp, which is normally paid
by the new owners. If the characters can't afford this fee
or don't want to pay it and they have befriended Renaer
Neverember, he makes sure that Volo has a pouch of
coins to cover the expense,

FINE FRIENDS

Yolo, Floon, and Renaer all express their gratitude
through camaraderie. If the characters need to call upon
their new friends for an occasional favor, any of them
are happy to oblige. Floon has little to offer the charac-
ters, but friendship with Volo and Renaer has its perks.

Volo knows the best places to eat and find merriment.
He can also give characters a tour of Waterdeep. If
the characters accept his offer, share the information
in chapter 9, “Volo's Waterdeep Enchiridion,” with
the players.

Although Renaer is estranged from his rich and pow-
erful father, he still has friends in high places. including
Harpers who can come to the characters’ rescue if they
need it. If the characters are looking for an audience
with influential persons in Waterdeep, Renaer can set
up meetings with Mirt, Remallia Haventree (see ap-
pendix B for both), or just about any other Waterdavian
noble, if he thinks the characters will comport them-
selves well.

LEVEL ADVANCEMENT

If you're using milestone level advancement instead of
tracking experience points, the characters advance from
1st to 2nd level when they return to Volo after having
explored the Xanathar Guild hideout.



@@@ 12 @@@



ROLLSKULL ALLEY IS FILLED WITH PEOPLE
who can shape the characters’ day-to-day
lives in Waterdeep. The characters will
likely return to Trollskull Alley many times
during the adventure and get to know their

D neighbors as time passes.

[ The locations described below are

keyed to the map of Trollskull Alley (map 2.1, page 33).

Buildings not specifically identified on the map are row-

houses that serve as private residences for upper-mid-

dle class Waterdavians who can afford housekeepers,
groundskeepers, and nannies.

T1. TROLLSKULL MANOR

See appendix C for a handout showing the floor plan of
this building. Give a copy of this handout to your players
as their characters begin to explore Trollskull Manor.

Four stories tall and boasting balconies, a turret, and
five chimneys, the abandoned building is one of the
grandest in Trollskull Alley. Characters can refurnish,
rebuild, rename, and otherwise personalize their new
stronghold to their hearts’ content.

TAVERN Roowms

When the characters first arrive, the tavern's taproom is
filled with broken furniture, tarnished silverware, casks
of wine that have turned to vinegar, and worthless detri-
tus. The tavern’s other rooms are all empty, except for
cobwebs, dust, and harmless rats.

SPIRIT ON TAP
The former tavern is haunted by the poltergeist (spec-
ter) of the tavern’'s previous barkeeper, a half-elf named
Lif. Maintaining the tavern was his life’'s work, and he
couldn’t abandon the place in death.

The poltergeist understands Common and Elvish, but
it can't speak. It invisibly causes mischief at the expense
of the new owners by smashing plates, breaking beer
barrels, and so forth. [f the characters don't take the
hint, it writes not-so-subtle warnings (such as “Closing
time!" and “Last call!”) on dusty floors and grimy win-
dows. To truly claim the tavern as their own, the charac-
ters must either appease the poltergeist or destroy it.

Appeasing Lif. 1f the characters work to repair and
renovate the tavern with the goal of opening it to the
public again, the poltergeist begins to accept them as
the new owners and gradually becomes quite accom-
modating: pulling out a chair when a character wants to
sit down, pouring a beer and delivering it to a character,
taking coats when folks come in from the rain, and so
forth, Once the business is up and running, Lif can also
perform other helplul functions, such as locking doors,
sweeping floors, and so forth.

Destroying Lif. Lif’s poltergeist is destroyed if its hit
points are reduced to 0. If attacked, it flees to the up-
permost level of the turret when reduced to half its hit
points. From there it fights to the bitter end. i

Je 0

V&7



@@@ 13 @@@



T2. THE BENT NAIL

A small wooden sign above this shop’s main door is bare
except for a large, bent nail sticking out of it. The front
room contains displays of ornate wooden furniture, as
well as a selection of bows and crossbows. The wall
behind the counter is lined with rows of finely carved
wooden canes, quarterstaffs, and shields.

Talisolvanar “Tally” Fellbranch, the owner and chief
artisan of the Bent Nail, is a male half-elf carpenter and
woodcarver. He is a commoner, with these changes:

« Tally is chaotic good.

+ He has these racial traits: He has advantage on saving
throws against being charmed, and magic can't put
him to sleep. He has darkvision out to a range of 60
feet. He speaks Common and Elvish.

SERVICES
Tally sells wooden weapons and shields at normal cost.
He also crafts and sells furniture and wood sculptures.

T3. STEAM AND STEEL

During daylight hours, smoke and steam billow from
the many windows around this indoor forge where
metal weapons. armor, and tools are made. The forge is
owned and operated by a married couple: a fire genasi
named Embric and a water genasi named Avi. Both are
members of the Most Careful Order of Skilled Smiths
and Metalforgers. As an armorer, Avi also belongs

to the Splendid Order of Armorers, Locksmiths, and
Finesmiths.

Embric tends the forge and is an expert weaponsmith.
He claims descent from the efreet of Calimshan and is
prone to extreme mood swings. He has the statistics of a
bandit captain, with these changes:

« Embric is neutral good.

« He has these racial traits: He can cast produce flame
at will. (Constitution is his spellcasting ability, and
he has a +4 bonus to hit with spell attacks.) He has
darkvision out to a range of 60 feet and resistance to
fire damage. He speaks Common and Primordial.

Avi worships Eldath, god of peace, and uses his magic
to quench hot steel. He is an expert armorsmith, Avi is
laid back and speaks plainly. He has the statistics of a
priest, with these changes:

+ Awvi is neutral good.

+ He has these racial traits: At will, he can control the
flow and shape of water in a 5-foot cube, or cause the
water to freeze for up to 1 hour. He has a swimming
speed of 30 feet, and he can breathe air and water. He
has resistance to acid damage. He speaks Common
and Primordial.

SERVICES

The genasi couple sells all metal weapons, armor, and
shields listed in chapter 5 of the Player's Handbook at
normal cost.

B CHAPTER 2 | TROLLSKULL ALLEY

T4. CoreLLON'S CROWN

Fala Lefaliir, an herbalist and a member of the Guild
of Apothecaries and Physicians, operates out of this
stately, three-story town house, the third floor of which
has been converted into a greenhouse. Its translucent
glass walls allow anyone on the street to see the rain-
bow of flowers blossoming within.

Fala Lefaliir is an outgoing wood elf with long,
braided hair. Like the elven god Corellon Larethian,
Fala is neither male nor female. If referred to as “he”
or “she,” Fala gently requests to be addressed by name
or as “they.” Fala is friends with a member of the Zhen-
tarim named Ziraj, who saved Fala’s life. He visits Fala
from time to time, and Fala has set aside a room for him
on the second floor.

Fala is a druid, with these changes:

+ Fala is chaotic good.

+ Fala has these racial traits: Fala has advantage on
saving throws against being charmed, and magic can't
put Fala to sleep. Fala has a walking speed of 35 feet
and darkvision out to a range of 60 feet. Fala speaks
Common, Druidic, and Elvish.

SERVICES

[n addition to nonmagical herbal remedies, Fala sells
potions of the types listed in the Fala’s Potions table.
Fala keeps 1d6 vials of each potion in locked cabinets
behind the shop counter.

FALA'S POTIONS

Potion Cost

Potion of animal friendship 125 gp
Potion of climbing 50 gp
Potion of greater healing 250 gp
Potion of healing 30 gp
Potion of water breathing 250 gp

T5. Ticer's EYE

This private detective's business is unremarkable on
the outside, its only distinguishing mark an orange-
and-black sign featuring a cat’s eyes. Inside is a regal
apartment dimly lit by flickering oil lamps. The door is
locked, and visitors must knock or ring the bell before
being let in.

They are met by Vincent Trench, a human detective
and the owner of the Tiger's Eye. He speaks concisely,
dresses in a sharp suit, and smokes a slim pipe. Vincent
is in fact a rakshasa named Valantajar that always casts
disguise self on itself before seeing visitors. The rak-
shasa has lived in Waterdeep for years, switching iden-
tities as often as needed to keep its true nature hiden.

It has grown accustomed to living among mortals and,
much to its own astonishment, is rather fond of Water-
deep and its citizens.

SERVICES

Trench can discover any secret in Waterdeep, for a fee.
Use your judgment when pricing its services; 50 gp is
sufficient for most investigations, but if the characters
want to learn secrets relating to the major antagonists



@@@ 14 @@@



North
entrance

‘ Ecp .

Northeast

entrance

T1)

\

South
entrance

1 square = 10 feet

Map 2.0; TROLLSKULL ALLEY (NogTH WagrDp)

of this adventure, the rakshasa might require a service
in payment, such as slaying enemies that are hunting it,
posting advertisements for its business in their tavern,
or keeping tabs on someone Vincent has been hired

to spy on.

T6. Book WyrMm's TREASURE

The front of this bookstore is adorned with a charming
sign of a gold dragon curled around a treasyre hoard
of books and scrolls. Inside. the shop is decorated with
beautiful hardwood, and the earthy scent of old books
permeates the air. The library fills two floors of this
three-story building, and it somehow seems (o contain
more shelves than the building should be able to hold.
The shop is managed by a short dragonborn of gold
dragon ancestry named Rishaal the Page-Turner, who

lives on the third floor. Rishaal, a member of the Watch-

ful Order of Magists and Protectors, is a mage, with
these changes:

+ Rishaal is neutral.

+ He has these racial traits: He can use his action to ex-
hale a 15-foot cone of fire (but can't do this again until
he finishes a short or long rest); each creature in the
cone must make a DC 10 Dexterity saving throw, tak-
ing 2d6 fire damage on a failed save, or half as much
damage on a successful one. He has resistance to fire
damage. He speaks Com mon, Draconie, Dwarvish,
and Elvish.

SERVICES

T'he shop contains books of alf sorts. In addition, Rish-
aal has a small collection of spelibooks and alfows
wizards to copy spells from them at the cast listed in the
Spells for Sale table. He can scribe any of these spells
as a spell scroll but charges twice the listed cost for

this service,

SPELLS FOR SALE

Spell Cost per Spell
Comprehend languages, detect ma gic, 25gp
feather fall, find familiar, mage armor,

magic missile, shield, unseen servant

Arcane lock, continual flame, darkvision, 75 gp

invisibility, magic weapon, misty step, rope ¥
trick, suggestion 3
Clairvoyance, counterspell, dispel magic, 150 gp ‘%
fireball, fly, nondetection, water breathing

Arcane eye, fabricate, greater invisibilit Y, 300 gp

ice storm, locate creature, polymorph

Bigby's hand, cone of cold, modify memory 750 gp

1T7. SEWER ACCESS

At the east end of Trollskull Alley is a removable metal
grate that covers an opening. Below the grate, a ladder
descends 20 feet into the Waterdeep sewer system.

CHAPTER 2 | TROLLSKULL ALLEY.



@@@ 15 @@@



JOINING FACTIONS

Word begins to spread throughout Waterdeep that a
group of adventurers helped Volothamp Geddarm and
rescued Renaer Neverember, Within days, faction rep-
resentatives begin to approach the characters and try
to recruit them. This book's introduction describes the
various factions and what they look for in recruits. The
characters need not all join the same faction, and some
might not want to join a faction at all.

A character who belongs to a faction is given a mission
upon gaining a level, from 2nd through 5th level. Com-
pleting the mission increases that member's renown in
the faction. Other characters who aren't faction mem-
bers can assist in the mission’s completion. A character
who belongs to a faction other than the Lords’ Alliance
can turn down a mission without consequence.

Each faction has a representative who serves as its
primary contact. This NPC delivers mission briefings
and dispenses the tangible rewards for completing a

BREGAN D’AERTHE MISSIONS

Party Level Mission Brief
2nd “I'd like you to steal a silk handkerchief from a
Waterdavian noble and give it to a tiefling girl
who lives in a crate at the corner of Net Street
and Dock Street, by the wharf."

3rd “This mission is so easy, a gang of street ur-
chins could pull it off. | want you to deliver an
exposé to Gaxly Rudderbust, the publisher of a
local broadsheet called The Waterdeep Wazoo,
without his knowing who wrote it or where it
came from. You'll find his office at the corner
of Immar Street and Stallion Street, in the

North Ward. Leave the story on his desk.”

4th “We've captured a member of the Xanathar
Guild, and I'd like you to guard him for three
nights until | or another member of Bregan
D'aerthe reclaims him. You'll find him trapped

in your basement.”

Sth “We have a spy deep within Xanathar's orga-
nization, but | fear he has been compromised.
It breaks my heart to do this, but I'm sending
you to eliminate him. Make it quick and pain-

less, and for Lolth's sake, be discreet,”

lGHhFTER 2 | TROLLSKULL ALLEY

mission. An increase in renown quickly follows, The
missions and the manner in which they can be com-
pleted are described in the tables throughout this sec-
tion. You can use missions from these tables or replace
any of them with ones of your own creation.

If a mission ends in failure, the characters can try
again after 24 hours, unless the failure has created cir-
cumstances where doing so is impossible.

BREGAN D’AERTHE

If one or more characters are drow, Jarlaxle Baenre has
his lieutenants, three drow gunslingers, shadow these
potential new recruits while keeping a safe distance.
Fel'rekt Lafeen and Krebbyg Masq'il'yr watch the char-
acters at night, and Soluun Xibrindas watches them
during the day (doing his best to stay out of the sunlight).
See appendix B for details on these lieutenants.
Characters who have a passive Wisdom (Perception)
score of 18 or higher see fleeting glimpses of the drow
spies over a period of several days and can, with a suc-

Mission Requirements and Reward
Finding a noble isn’t hard, but snatching one's handkerchief without

being detected requires a successful DC 12 Dexterity (Sleight of

Hand) check. One can also convince a noble to surrender it with

a successful DC 12 Charisma (Deception, Intimidation, or Persua-
sion) check. The tiefling girl in the crate thanks the characters for

the hanky. Reward: Each Bregan D'aerthe character gains 1 renown.
Jarlaxle has written an exposé on devil worship among unnamed
Waterdavian noble families. The story mentions orgies and secret
deals happening behind closed doors. (Jarlaxle never passes up a
chance to rattle the nobility and sow political unrest.) A character
can break into Gaxly's office while it's closed, either during lunch
hour or after hours. Getting in and out without being seen requires
two successful DC 15 Dexterity (Stealth) checks, and getting past

a locked door requires a successful DC 10 Dexterity check using

thieves' tools (or a knock spell or similar magic). Reward: Each Bre-

gan D'aerthe character gains 1 renown.

Characters who search the basement of their Trollskull Alley tavern
find Ott Steeltoes (see appendix B) bound by iron bands of Bilarro.
How he got there is anyone’s guess; even he doesn’t know, On the
first night, Xanathar sends a gang of six bugbears to attack the tav-
ern and rescue Ott. |f the characters have moved Ott elsewhere, the
bugbears attack the tavern anyway. On the second night, four mem-
bers of the Dungsweepers’' Guild (commoners) with intellect de-

vourers in their skulls visit the tavern. They order drinks and scope

out the tavern, attacking if they find Ott or leaving if they don't. On

the third night, a beholder zombie attacks. After the third attack, Ott

disappears as mysteriously as he arrived, along with the iron bands
of Bilarro. Reward: Each Bregan D'aerthe character gains 2 renown.

Jarlaxle identifies the traitor as a drow mage named Nar'l Xibrindas

(see appendix B) and furnishes the characters with a route to Xana-
thar's lair through underground passageways. (Xanathar's lair is de-
scribed in chapter 5. Characters who follow Jarlaxle’s route arrive at
area X1.) Reward: Each Bregan D'aerthe character gains 2 renown.
Each party member who contributes to the mission receives a tro-
phy bearing a gold statuette of |arlaxle (worth 250 gp).



@@@ 16 @@@



cessful DC 15 Wisdom (Insight) check, ascertain that
these spies are paying particular attention to the activi-
ties of the drow party members.

JARLAXLE BAENRE

[f the party reports the drow to the City Watch, Jarlaxle
ends the surveillance and breaks off all contact with the
characters for the time being.

On the other hand, if the characters try to confront
the drow spies, they avoid contact but leave behind a
black eye patch as a calling card. The next day, Jarlaxle
Baenre (see appendix B) shows up at the party’s
headquarters, using his hat of disguise to appear as a
haberdasher named J.B. Nevercott. In this guise, he
asks to speak privately with drow characters who he
thinks might make suitable Bregan D'aerthe recruits.
Only drow are given serious consideration, but Jarlaxle
doesn’t care if they're male or female. As a test, he offers
them their first mission.

Jarlaxle is a consummate actor who never lets down
his guard. Even if the characters discern his true iden-
tity, he never admits to being anything other than what
he pretends to be.

EMERALD ENCLAVE MISSIONS

Party Level Mission Brief
2nd “Outlying farms are being terrorized by a
scarecrow come to life. It has slaughtered live-
stock, chased horses, and spooked farmers.
No people have been killed as yet, so the City
Guard is dragging its heels. Something must
be done!”
3rd “Sir Ambrose Everdawn, a grizzled old cham-
pion of Kelemvor, has offered to help the City
Guard catch a necromancer who's stealing
bones from the City of the Dead and animating
them as skeletons. Sir Ambrose could use your
help, if you're not too busy.”

4th “Doppelgangers threaten the balance of power
in Waterdeep. Rumor has it a group of them
are hiding in the Yawning Portal. Root them
out and rid the city of them if you can.”

“The Xanathar Guild is releasing monsters
to distract the City Watch and the City Guard
while its members stir up trouble elsewhere.
The authorities are having trouble catching
and killing a flying horror known as a grell.
This aberration was latest seen snatching up
an old woman in the Dock Ward. Unless we

intervene, she won't be the last.”

5th

EMERALD ENCLAVE

The Emerald Enclave takes an interest in characters
who seek to preserve the balance within Waterdeep
(particularly clerics of nature, druids, and rangers). Any
such character is visited by a white cat that speaks the
following message in a melodious male voice:

[ [ |
“Interested in joining the Emerald Enclave? Come meet
us at Phaulkonmere in the Southern Ward."

) {

The cat is an ordinary animal upon which an animal
messenger spell was cast. It dashes away after deliver-
ing its invitation.

MELANNOR FELLBRANCH

The characters’ main contact in the Emerald Enclave
is Melannor Fellbranch, the friendly but humorless
groundskeeper of Phaulkonmere, a compound located
one block south of Kolat Towers (see chapter 8). Phaul-
konmere is owned by the Tarm and Phaulkon noble
families. Melannor delivers missions by way of animal
messenger spells and is partial to using cats and pi-
geons as couriers. He quickly assigns new members
their first mission.

Mission Requirements and Reward
Not one but three scarecrows are terrorizing Undercliff. One wears

a sackcloth hood, another has a rotting pumpkin head, and the

third is covered with a threadbare blanket. Characters who camp in
a field for the better part of a day or night have a 10 percent chance
of encountering one of the scarecrows. The attacks continue until
all three scarecrows are destroyed. Reward: 'Each' Emerald Enclave
character gains 1 renown for ending the threat,

Convincing Ambrose Everdawn (LG male human Tethyrian knight)
that the party intends to help requires a successful DC 13 Charisma
(Persuasion) check. If the check succeeds, Sir Ambrose asks the
party to patrol the southern half of the cemetery for ten consecutive
nights while he patrols the north half. The characters have a cumu-
lative 10 percent chance each night of encountering six skeletons,
but there's no sign of the necromancer who animated them. Once
the skeletons are destroyed, no further encounters occur. After a
tenday, Sir Ambrose releases the characters from service. Reward:
Each Emerald Enclave character gains 1 renown. Each party mem-
ber who patrolled the cemetery for all ten nights receives 100 gp.
The characters need to confront “Bonnie” the doppelganger and, ’
with a successful DC 15 Charisma (Intimidation or P&rs&aéibnj-
check, convince her to leave Waterdeep and take her gang with her.
Reward: Each Emerald Enclave character gains 2 renown.

Locating the grell requires a successful DC 18 Intelligence (Inves-
tigation) check followed by a successful DC 18 Wisdom (Survival)
check. Each check, whether successful or not, represents 1 hour of
gathering information or tracking spoor. In fact, there are two grells.
One grell tries to flee if the other is killed. Reward: Each Emerald
Enclave character gains 2 renown. Jeryth bestows a charm of hero-
ism (see “Supernatural Gifts" in chapter 7 of the Dungeon Master’s
Guide) on each party member who helped slay the grells.

CHAPTER 2 | TROLLSKULL ALLEY: "



@@@ 17 @@@



.

i -

Melannor is a half-elf druid, with these changes:

« Melannor is chaotic good.

- He has these racial traits: He has advantage on saving
throws against being charmed, and magic can’t put
him to sleep. He has darkvision out to a range of 60
feet. He speaks Common and Elvish.

JERYTH PHAULKON
When the characters arrive at Phaulkonmere for the
first time, Melannor introduces them to the lady of the
estate: a noblewoman-turned-demigod and Chosen of
Mielikki named Jeryth Phaulkon. Jeryth, the only mem-
ber of her family who currently resides at Phaulkon-
mere, manifests as a disembodied female voice that can
be heard by anyone in the villa gardens. She offers mem-
bership in the enclave and bestows on each new mem-
ber a charm of restoration (see “Supernatural Gifts” in
chapter 7 of the Dungeon Master'’s Guide). Jeryth also of-
fers Phaulkonmere as a safe haven for enclave members
and their friends.

In her disembodied state, Jeryth can’t be harmed. If
the need arises, Jeryth can cast any spell on the druid

Force GREY (GRAY HANDS) MISSIONS

Party Level Mission Brief
2nd “Seek out Hlam, a monk who lives in a cave on
the side of Mount Waterdeep. Ask him what
he’s heard about threats to the city, but try not
to annoy him or overstay your welcome.”

3rd “A young bronze dragon has taken up resi-
dence in Deepwater Harbor, It startled a few
sailors recently but hasn't hurt anyone. Con-

front the dragon and learn its intentions.”

4th “A member of Force Grey has been act-

ing strangely of late. His name is Meloon
Wardragon, and his happy-go-lucky demeanor
has soured. He's been hanging around the
Yawning Portal more than usual. Observe him

for a tenday, then report back to me.”

5th “Xanathar is using intellect devourers to
take control of Waterdavians in key positions
throughout the city. We must deal with this
problem at once. Infiltrate Xanathar's lair and
destroy whatever is responsible for creating

these creatures.”

FOHAPTER 2 | TROLLSKULL ALLEY

spell list, She uses her spells in defense of her estate
and its beautiful gardens. A member of the Emerald
Enclave can petition Jeryth to cast a spell, which she
is happy to do if that character’s renown in the enclave
equals or exceeds the spell’s level.

FORCE GREY (GRAY HANDS)

The Blackstaff, Vajra Safahr (see appendix B), is friends
with Renaer Neverember, and word of his rescue quickly
reaches her ears. She uses a sending spell to deliver the
following short message to one of the characters:

“I am Vajra Safahr, the Blackstaff. Come to Blackstaff
Tower in the Castle Ward at once. Bring your friends.”

Despite her insistent tone, Vajra doesn't take offense

if the character refuses her invitation. A day later, she
casts another sending spell and reaches out to a dif-
ferent party member. If she is refused a second time,
she doesn't contact the party again until the characters
gain a level.

Mission Requirements and Reward

Those who climb the mountainside to reach the cave must succeed
on a DC 12 Constitution saving throw or arrive with 1d4 levels of
exhaustion. Trying to get Hlam (see appendix B) to share informa-
tion requires a DC 12 Charisma (Persuasion) check. If the check
succeeds, he tells the characters, “Evil’s twin hides its face for now.
Expect that to change before winter’s end.” (This is an oblique ref-
erence to Manshoon.) The characters can descend the mountain
safely. Reward: Each Gray Hand character gains 1 renown,

Vajra gives each character a potion of water breathing to complete
this mission. They find a young bronze dragon, Zelifarn, swimming
around a barnacle-covered shipwreck at the bottom of the deep
harbor. The friendly dragon tries to coax as much treasure as it can
from the characters. Those who converse with Zelifarn can make a
DC 13 Wisdom (Insight) check. A successful check reveals that the
dragon poses no danger to Waterdeep. If no one succeeds on the
check, the dragon's true intentions can't be gleaned. Reward: Each
Gray Hand character gains 1 renown.

Characters can befriend Meloon Wardragon (see appendix B) or
watch him from afar. Each day at dawn, Meloon engages in a tele-
pathic contest of wills with his magic axe, Azuredge (see appendix
A), before leaving his room at the Yawning Portal. The axe wants

a new wielder, but Meloon refuses to part with it. Characters who
observe Meloon during this exchange can ascertain what's going on
with a successful DC 15 Wisdom (Insight) check. Reward: Each Gray
Hand character gains 2 renown. If the characters rid Meloon of the
intellect devourer in his skull, Vajra gives the party a wand of secrets.
The characters must slay Nihiloor the mind flayer (see appendix B).
They can stake out a Xanathar Guild hideout (see chapter 1) and
wait for Nihiloor to show up there, or confront the mind flayer in
Xanathar's lair (see chapter 5). Reward: Each Gray Hand character
gains 2 renown. Every character who participated in the raid re-
ceives a potion of resistance. In addition, Vajra covers the cost of any
raise dead spells needed to bring back dead characters.



@@@ 18 @@@



VAJRA SAFAHR HARPERS
Blackstaff Tower is a fortress and a wizard training .
academy all in one. From here, Vajra Safahr watches
over the city and asserts herself as Blackstaff. Sending
spells are her preferred way of communicating with her

The Harpers approach good-aligned characters who
show promise as spies. One such character receives
the following message, written on a paper bird (see

: dix A):
operatives. appendix A)
Vajra offers the characters membership in the Gray B -
Hands, a private security force under her command. She “Renaer tells us you are a good bet. He bought you
doles out missions designed to tax the characters’ re- tickets to the opera tonight at the Lightsinger Theater

sources and test their loyalty to Waterdeep. Characters
who complete these missions won't gain enough renown
to join Force Grey yet, but they will gain something
valuable: the Blackstaff's patronage. Vajra continues to admittance.”
take an interest in their adventuring careers, helping out . .
when she can.

in the Sea Ward. If you are interested, meet Mirt at
intermission. Private Box C. Formal attire is required for

HARPER MiSSIONS

Party Level Mission Brief Mission Requirements and Reward
2nd “One of the drays working in the city is pulled  Characters can find Maxeene, a draft horse with an Intelligence
by a talking mare named Maxeene. Locate score of 10, with a successful DC 13 Intelligence (Investigation)

her, find out if she’s learned the identity of any check. Maxeene speaks Common, and characters must try to con-
Zhent operatives, and if so, determine their  vince her that they're Harpers by making a DC 13 Charisma (Persua-
whereabouts.” sion) check. If the check succeeds, the horse recalls giving a ride to
a sun elf and his half-orc bodyguard two days ago; she picked them
up at an intersection (she doesn’t recaifl which onej and dropped
them off at the Yawning Portal. They talked about hiring spies to
root out Xanathar Guild hideouts in the city. Maxeene's descriptions
of the passengers match the appearances of Davil Starsong and
Yagra Stonefist. Reward: Each Harper character gains 1 renown.
3rd “Uza Solizeph is an old woman who sells Uza (LG female human Mulan commoner) describes the threat as a
books out of a narrow three-story buildingon  “monstrous orb of many eyes" that chased her cat, Fillipa, into the
Sorn Street in the Trades Ward. She claims to  shop. The monster is, in fact, a gazer (see appendix B). If the char-
have trapped a monster in her shop and fears  acters met a gazer in chapter 1, they know what they're up against.
for the welfare of her books and her cat. The Uza lends them the keys to the front and back doors of her shop.
City Watch isn't likely to lend a hand, given Characters find the interior in shambles and hear a cat meowing
Uza's propensity for tall tales, but the Harp- on the third floor. The sounds are coming from the gazer, which is
ers owe her a favor. You'll find her sobbing at  hunting Fillipa. The cat has so far eluded the nasty little predator.
Felzoun's Folly, a tavern on the corner of Sorn  Reward: Each Harper character gains 1 renown if the gazer is de-

Street and Salabar Street, Make haste!” feated. Uza also gives the party a used spellbook containing four
Ist-level and three 2nd-level wizard spells.
4th “One of our members, Mattrim Mereg, has The characters must speak with five doppelgangers, starting with

allied himself with a gang of doppelgangers  their leader, “Bonnie,” who works at the Yawning Portal. She needs
and believes the Harpers should recruit them. a few days to round up the other doppelgangers, who agree to meet
We need an unb:igséﬂ: opinion. Track down and  at the tavern in human guises. Characters must interview each
speak with each of the dgppg_lgan'gers_._ and doppelganger and succeed on a DC 16 Wisdom (Insight) check to

gauge their trustworthiness.” ascertain its trustworthiness. Only “Bonnie” is trustworthy. Reward:
Each Harper character gains 2 renown. Every contributing party
member receives 50 gp. d
5th “Lady Remallia Haventree is hosting a party at Remallia Haventree (see appendix B) knows of the mission, but it's j
House Ulbrinter, her villa on Delzorin Street,  not revealed to the characters that she's a Harper. There's one drow
located between Vhezoar Street and Brondar's spy in attendance: Jarlaxle Baenre (see appendix B). He uses his hat
Way in the North Ward. We have reason to of disguise to appear as a young actor from Luskan named Erystian
suspect that drow spies have infiltrated the Demarne. A successful DC 24 Wisdom (Insight) check is needed
guest list. Attend the party and root out the to out Jarlaxle. Impressed by the perceptive adventurers, he thanks
disguised drow. Dress sharply.” Lady Haventree for an entertaining evening and dashes off, but

not without first tipping his hat to the character or characters who
exposed him. Reward: Each Harper character gains 2 renown. Every
party member who attended the party receives 200 gp.

CHAPTER 2 | TROLLSKULL ALLEY. 4l



@@@ 19 @@@



Enclosed are tickets for the entire party to The Fall
of Tiamat, an opera sung in Giant describing the evil
dragon queen’s defeat at the Well of Dragons.

MIRrT

If any of the characters join the Harpers, Mirt (see ap-
pendix B) becomes their main Harper contact through-
out the adventure.

Lightsinger Theater is a high-end establishment lo-
cated in the Castle Ward. If the characters meet Mirt
in his private box during the opera’s intermission, he
describes the Harpers and offers membership to eligi-
ble characters. Characters who accept receive a silver
pin of a harp within a crescent moon, along with their
first mission (see the Harpers Missions table). Mirt
also tells them that if they ever need to speak with him
directly, they are welcome to visit his manor in the Sea
Ward. If the characters do visit Mirt's manor, there's a
90 percent chance that Mirt isn't home and no one an-
swers the door.

LORDS’ ALLIANCE MISSIONS

Party Level Mission Brief

2nd “A gang war is causing unrest throughout the
city. We have offered protection to members
of the Dungsweepers' Guild, and you have
been assigned to protect a group of them.
Meet them at the Muleskull Tavern, on Ship
Street in the Dock Ward, at six bells and guard
them while they work. Do this every day for a
tenday.”
“Harko Swornhold, an evil adventurer who was
exiled three years ago for attempting to bribe a

3rd

city magistrate, has returned to Waterdeep ille-

gally, We think the Xanathar Guild is using him
to incite violence. He was last seen recruiting
kenku in the Dock Ward. Find him and quietly
put him to the sword.”
4th
named Esloon Bezant, trying to add his gang
of thugs to their ranks. All we know about him
is that he fled his homeland a few years back
and is too smart to get caught doing anything
illegal. He and his gang of bullies prowl the
Dock Ward. Scuttle the deal, and do it fast!”
5th “The City Watch is overwhelmed by the recent
surge in violence and needs our help. We have
reports of an assassin prowling the rooftops,
picking off targets with arrows and alarming
citizens. My sources say he goes to ground
somewhere near Trollskull Alley. Find him,
alert the City Watch to his whereabouts, and
aid in his arrest if you can. Don't kill him, since
doing that could escalate the violence further.”

@ CHAPTER 2 | TROLLSKULL ALLEY

LORDS ALLIANCE

Characters who place the security of the city and the
realm ahead of their own interests are invited to join
this faction. Potential recruits must be residents of
Waterdeep.

JALESTER SILVERMANE
The characters’ primary contact is Jalester Silvermane
(see appendix B), a field agent who reports to Open Lord
Laeral Silverhand. Jalester spends much of his time in
the Yawning Portal and other taverns that adventurers
are known to frequent.

Jalester offers membership in the Lords’ Alliance to
those who qualify. Members are expected to complete
whatever missions are assigned to them in a timely, pro-
fessional manner. Refusing to accept or complete a mis-
sion can result in suspension or dismissal. An alliance
member who is suspended receives no alliance missions
until the suspension ends, while dismissal from the
alliance means a loss of membership and the loss of all
renown in the faction.

Mission Requirements and Reward

Each morning, the characters meet with a team of four dungsweep-
ers (commoners) and head to the Trades Ward, where the sweepers
spend the day cleaning up waste in the streets. It's boring ﬂuric.;-
On the ninth day, around highsun, a carrion crawler emerges from
a nearby alley, pursued by two City Watch guards. The characters
can help slay the carrion crawler, which came up from the sewers.
Reward: Each Lords" Alliance character gains 1 renown.

Whichever character leads the search must succeed on three DC
14 Intelligence (Investigation) checks before gaining three failures,
with each check representing 8 hours of investigation. Other char-
acters can assist, granting advantage on the checks. Harko (bandit
captain) has two kenku companions that fight by his side. Reward:
Each Lords’ Alliance character gains 1 renown.

“The Zhents are courting a Red Wizard of Thay The characters can create a rift between the Zhentarim and Es-

loon’s gang by sowing rumors of betrayal. They must spend 25 gp
in bribes and succeed on a DC 16 Charisma (Deception or Persua-
sion) check. Conversely, they can confront Esloon Bezant (LE male
Thayan human mage) and his gang of five thugs and either defeat
them or bribe them with at least 500 gp. Reward: Each Lords' Alli-
ance character gains 2 renown. The characters can also deprive Es-
loon of his spellbook, which contains all the spells he has prepared.,
Whichever character leads the hunt must succeed on three DC 13
Intelligence (Investigation) checks before gaining three failures,
with each check representing 8 hours of investigation. Other char-
acters can assist, granting advantage on the checks. If the search
succeeds, characters corner the assassin, Ziraj the Hunter (see ap-
pendix B), in the greenhouse of Corellon’s Crown in Trollskull Alley
(area T4). Ziraj surrenders to the City Watch without a fight, believ-
ing that his fellow Zhents will find a way to free him. Reward: Each
Lords' Alliance character gains 2 renown. Every character who aids

in Ziraj's capture receives 50 gp.



@@@ 20 @@@



ORDER OF THE GAUNTLET

The Order of the Gauntlet looks for members who seek
to fight evil in all its forms. Adventurers who worship
Helm, Torm, or Tyr are especially sought after.

SAVRA BELABRANTA

If the party includes one or more likely recruits, Savra

Belabranta (NG female Tethyrian human knight) visits
the characters’ residence and invites them to the Halls
of Justice, the temple of Tyr (located west of the Market

cult called the Howling Hatred. Savra’'s sins are irrele-
vant to this adventure, but you can learn more about her
past in Princes of the Apocalypse. Whenever she has a
mission for the characters, she communicates the mis-
sive to them herself.

ZHENTARIM

The Doom Raiders try to contact evil-aligned or morally
ambiguous characters. A flying snake with a parchment
tied about its body visits one character in the dead of

in the Castle Ward), where they can be sworn into the night. The message reads:

order. The swearing-in ceremony involves the recitation
of an oath to find and destroy evil in all its forms. The
oath is spoken while every candidate wears a silver
gauntlet (a symbol of the order). After the ceremony,
Savra gives new recruits their first mission.

The Belabrantas are a Waterdavian noble family that
raises griffons for the Griffon Cavalry. Savra is trying to
regain her honor by serving Tyr, thus atoning for the evil
acts she committed as a member of an evil elemental

L 4 L |
“Want to be part of something big? Speak to Davil Star-
song at the Yawning Portal."

i ‘

If the characters seek out Davil, Yagra Stonefist
(see “Familiar Faces,” page 20) greets them and
leads interested parties to a table in the center of the

Yawning Portal’s taproom, where her boss waits with
drink in hand.

ORDER OF THE GAUNTLET MISSIONS

Party Level Mission Brief Mission Requirements and Reward

2nd “We hear that the Zhents are paying gangs in  The characters must visit the Field Ward and, as a fight threatens
the Field Ward to attack suspected Xanathar  to break out, make three successful DC 12 Charisma (Intimidation)
Guild members. Fights are breaking out in the  checks before failing three checks, or else defeat four thugs (pref-
ward daily. Stop a fight before it happens. We  erably without killing them) to disperse the would-be brawlers.
need to send a message to these thugs that Reward: Each Order of the Gauntlet character gains 1 renown.
further altercations won't be tolerated.”

3rd “A notorious thief called the Black Viper, long
thought dead, has apparently returned to
Waterdeep. She has already robbed at least
a dozen noble estates. No one knows her
identity because she wears a mask, but it was

reported in The Waterdeep Wazoo that she's

The characters can meet with Gaxly Rudderbust (N male Illuskan
human commoner), the publisher of The Waterdeep Wazoo, and
either succeed on a DC 12 Charisma (Intimidation or Persuasion)
check or bribe him with at least 50 gp. If they do so, Gaxly shares

his suspicions that the Black Viper is the secret, evil twin sister of
Ammalia Cassalanter (see appendix B), and that she wears a mask

a noble. Find out what else the broadsheet's to hide a disfigurement. Interviewing the Cassalanters at their villa
publisher knows about her and report backto  (see chapter 6) or conducting a day-long investigation and succeed-
me." ing on a DC 15 Intelligence (Investigation) check reveals that no
such person exists. Reward: Each Order of the Gauntlet character
gains 1 renown for reporting what Gaxly said.

The inn is being harassed by the Shard Shunners, a gang of halfling
wererats, because the innkeeper's guards once threatened a gang
member. To end the harassment, the characters must defeat three
wererats or scare them off with a successful DC 17 Charisma (Intim-
idation) check. Reward: Each Order of the Gauntlet character gains
2 renown and receives a potion of healing.

The characters must help Savra defeat five spined devils, which k
have locals pinned down in nearby buildings. Right afterward, Gy- -
sheer Omfreys (LE female Tethyrian human cult fanatic) emerges
from an alley and attacks Savra. Gysheer is an overzealous member
of a devil-worshiping cult led by Victoro Cassalanter (see appendix

4th “Guards at the Endshift Tavern, located on
Endshift Street in the Field Ward, are being
robbed nightly, and the innkeeper says he's
seen giant rats prowling around the back al-
leys. Sounds dull, but it's a plea for help that
we can't ignore.”

Sth “| just received a report that spined devils are
terrorizing citizens in Twelvedog Court, in the
Field Ward. Come, let us slay them together
and find their evil summoner!”

B). Savra tries to subdue and question her, but only magical com-
pulsion can force her to implicate Victoro. Since devil worship isn't
illegal in Waterdeep, Savra has no grounds to stir up trouble with
the Cassalanters, and she advises characters not to do so, either.
Reward: Each Order of the Gauntlet character gains 2 renown. Every
character who took part receives a potion of greater healing.

CHAPTER 2 | TROLLSKULL ALLEY.

@@@ 1 @@@



DAVIL STARSONG

Davil Starsong (see appendix B) is the characters’
primary contact in the Black Network, at least initially.
Over drinks, he shares the following information:

« Davil is a retired adventurer. He and his adventuring
companions joined the Zhentarim a few years back.
They help people in need. (More specifically, they pro-
vide loans, mercenaries, and other services.)

« Another Black Network gang has recently infiltrated
the city and tried to take over the Xanathar Guild.
They failed, setting off a war in the streets. Davil and

ZHENTARIM MISSIONS

Party Level Mission Brief
2nd “Someone is killing elf and half-elf sailors in
the Dock Ward—three dead so far, each one
decapitated by a blade in the dead of night.
Look into it, will you? Methinks the City Watch
could use a little help.”

3rd “There's a shop in the Trades Ward called
Weirdbottle's Concoctions. The gnome who
runs it is a friend of ours named Skeemo. He's
made some potions of mind reading for a client,
Pick up the potions and deliver them to the
God Catcher, one of the enormous statues in
the Castle Ward. Give the potions to the lady in
the purple cloak, and keep the tip.”

4th “Waterdeep's richest halfling family, the
Snobeedles, is offering 500 gold pieces for in-
formation leading to the safe return of a miss-
ing family member named Dasher Snobeedle.
Those dragons sure would look good in our
coffers! Investigate and see what you can
learn, but don’t get in any trouble. The City
Watch already has it out for us.”

5th “Skeemo Weirdbottle has betrayed us! The lit-
tle worm has been feeding information to our
enemies. He must be eliminated. Make it look
like an accident.”

ICHAPTER 2 | TROLLSKULL ALLEY

his colleagues want to end the violence and restore
the peace.

Davil offers membership in the faction to interested
characters, then assigns them their first mission (see
the Zhentarim Missions table). Subsequent mission
briefings are written on scrolls and delivered by fly-
ing snakes.

TASHLYN YAFEERA

After the characters complete two missions for Davil,
he is arrested by the City Watch and held in Castle Wa-
terdeep while he waits to be questioned by the Lords

Mission Requirements and Reward

Characters who spend three consecutive nights loitering around

the docks spot Heldar, a drunk half-elf sailor (bandit), leaving the
Muleskull Tavern (on Ship Street in the Dock Ward). Characters who
follow Heldar can save him from Soluun Xibrindas, a renegade drow
gunslinger (see appendix B). Soluun hides in the shadows, blade
drawn, waiting for the half-elf to stumble by. Spotting him before
he strikes requires a successful DC 18 Wisdom (Perception) check.
Soluun flees if reduced to half his hit points or fewer. Reward: Each
Zhentarim character gains 1 renown. If Heldar survives Soluun’s
attack, each character receives 50 gp.

Skeemo Weirdbottle (see appendix B) has placed four potions of
poison in a small silk-lined coffer. The potions look, smell, and taste
like potions of mind reading. Awaiting delivery near the God Catcher
is Esvele Rosznar, the Black Viper (see appendix B). She wears a
hooded purple cloak and is seated in the back of a hire-coach. She
exchanges the coffer for a black velvet pouch, then orders her driver
to depart. The coach delivers Esvele to her estate in the Sea Ward.
Reward: Each Zhentarim character gains 1 renown. Esvele’s pouch
contains 15 pp, which the characters can keep.

Any character who spends at least three days asking pertinent
questions and pursuing leads in the Southern Ward or the Dock
Ward can, at the end of that time, make a DC 18 Charisma (Persua-
sion or Intimidation) check. On a success, the character convinces
some tight-lipped halflings to arrange a meeting with Dasher, The
meeting is scheduled to occur at highsun in Waymoot the next day.
Dasher shows up to hear what the characters have to say, but he has
no intention of going home. He recently joined a gang of halfling
wererats called the Shard Shunners (so named because they detest
silver) and has since become a wererat himself (see chapter 1 for
halfling wererat statistics). The Shard Shunners are his family now.
Reward: Each Zhentarim character gains 2 renown.

Skeemo Weirdbottle (see appendix B) manages to stay one step
ahead of the characters. As they approach his shop, they see him
ride off in a dray with five other passengers and a driver (all com-
moners). If Skeemo realizes he’s being followed, he casts fly and
takes to the air. If the effect is dispelled or the characters maintain
pursuit, he casts greater invisibility on himself and uses crowds to
cover his escape. If the characters fail to nab him, he takes refuge

in Kolat Towers (see chapter 8). Reward: Each Zhentarim character
gains 2 renown if Skeemo is eliminated without implicating the
Black Network. In addition, characters who snatch Skeemo's satchel
find that it holds his spellbook (containing all the spells he has pre-
pared), a potion of mind reading, and 150 gp in a silk coin purse.



@@@ 2 @@@



of Waterdeep about the Black Network'’s operations in
the city. The characters continue to receive missions,
but they come from Tashlyn Yafeera (see appendix B).
Characters first become aware of this change when they
receive their next mission briefing, since it's written in a
different hand.

If the characters want to speak with Tashlyn directly,
Yagra can arrange a meeting in the City of the Dead or
some other quiet place. By the time the characters see
her, Tashlya has learned the following information:

» The rumored leader of the renegade Zhent faction is
Urstul Floxin, a known Black Network assassin.

« A warrant has been issued for Urstul's arrest, but his
current whereabouts are unknown. Even magical
scrying has failed to reveal his location.

+ The botched kidnapping of Renaer Neverember won't
sit well with Urstul. He might try again. (Tashlyn
doesn't actually believe this, but she knows that
Renaer has ties to the Harpers and might share
information of interest with the characters.)

Weeks after his arrest, Davil is released from cus-
tody once the Lords of Waterdeep are satisfied that
neither he nor his associates are responsible for the re-
cent violence.

OPEN FOR BUSINESS?

[f the characters intend to fix up and reopen the tavern
in Trollskull Alley, they can expect to deal with various
guilds without whose support the business is likely to
fail. Repairs to the walls and the roof require the ap-
proval and oversight of the Carpenters’, Roofers’, and
Plaisterers' Guild. The Cellarers’ and Plumbers’ Guild
is best equipped to handle the refurbishing of the base-
ment and plumbing. Clean bedsheets are provided by

the Launderers’ Guild. The streets around the establish-

ment are kept up by the Dungsweepers’ Guild and the
Loval Order of Street Laborers. Meat must come from
the Guild of Butchers; ale and wine from the Vintners',
Distillers’, and Brewers' Guild; and bread and pastries
from the Bakers' Guild. The list goes on,

The “Tavern Keeping Expenses” sidebar lists the
costs that the characters must pay to get their place
ready for business, as well as the recurring obligations
they must meet while the tavern is open for business,

SAMPLE GUILD REPRESENTATIVES

Once it becomes known around the city that the tavern
in Trollskull Alley is planning to reopen its doors to the
public, the adventurers receive visits from guild repre-
sentatives interested in the tavern'’s welfare. This sec-
tion describes a handful of these representatives.

BROXLEY FAIRKETTLE
Fellowship of Innkeepers

Broxley (LG male strongheart halfling commoner)

is a laid-back, law-abiding halfling with mutton chops
and bushy eyebrows. Inns and taverns are few and

far between in the North Ward, so he makes frequent
visits to the characters' place to see how it's doing and
to offer his well-wishes. If none of the characters are

members of the guild, he strongly urges them to join
“to avoid further harassment.” The cost of member-
ship in the Fellowship of Innkeepers is included in the
regular expenses outlined in the “Tavern Keeping Ex-
penses’ sidebar.

Broxley has long believed the tavern to be haunted and
is glad to see living souls in it once more. While lament-
ing the burdens of being a father of nine, he is quick to
point out that the characters’ continued compliance with
guild rules and regulations makes his rather difficult life
"just a bitty bit easier.”

HAMMOND KRADDOG
Vintners', Distillers’, and Brewers' Guild

Hammond (N male [lluskan human commoner) doesn't
like adventurers, but he likes their coin. This effete,
well-dressed man is always seen in the company of a
young scribe, Jinny (NG female tiefling commoner), who
wears spectacles and silently records notes and conver-
sations in a small book as Hammond speaks.

Hammond likes to stop by in the middle of the month
to inform the characters of new spirits that the guild has
to offer, and to give them a list of which ones to push
hard. To test the extent of their willingness to cooperate,
he chastises them for their current selection of bever-
ages, even if he previously sold them those goods.

JusTyYN RassK
Guild of Butchers

Dead-eyed, slack-jawed Justyn (NE male Illuskan hu-
man thug) grew up in the toughest neighborhood in

the Field Ward and has the scars to prove it. The guild
doesn’t pay him enough for him to afford a residence in
the North Ward, and going to that part of the city fills
his heart with resentment. He darkens the characters’
doorstep once a month to deliver a cartload of chopped
meat for the tavern’s larder. Although delivery fees are
covered by the guild's monthly dues, Justyn always de-
mands some extra coin for his service. If the characters
don’t give him a gratuity of at least 3 gp, he says, "Maybe
next time the meat will be someone you know.” He lets
the threat hang in the air, then departs.

" “A
TAVERN KEEPING EXPENSES

This sidebar summarizes the one-time payments and
continuing expenses associated with running the tavern in
Trollskull Alley, as well as providing rules for determining
how much coin the business makes or loses.

One-Time Expenses
- 1,000 gp to renovate the tavern over 12 days
« 250 gp for guiid ficenses and contracts (paid up front)

Regular Expenses
« 50 gp per tenday for maintenance and wages of hirelings
« 10 gp per tenday for all other guild expenses

Profit or Loss

At the end of every tenday, roll a d100 + 10 and consult

the Running a Business table in chapter 6 of the Dungeon
Master’s Guide to determine whether the tavern lost money
or earned profit. if the characters spent coin on promoting
their business during that tenday, add 1 to the rol| for each
1 gp they spent. If the characters have unpaid expenses,
subtract 1 from the roll for each 1 gp they owe.

F_

s bl A

Y4
£)-

CHAPTER 2 | TROLLSKULL ALLEY



@@@ 3 @@@



ULKORIA STONEMARROW
Watchiful Order of Magists and Protectors

Ulkoria (NG female shield dwarf archmage) has de-
fended Waterdeep with her magic more times than

she can recall. She's known as “the Gargoyle” because
her face is frozen in a scowl that frightens adults and
children alike. No one knows where she lives, but it's
believed to be underground, possibly a cellar or dungeon
under one of the city's oldest estates, She uses teleport
spells to enter and leave her home, and she'’s never seen
without her shield guardian close by.

A little known fact is that Ulkoria once owned the
tavern in Trollskull Alley. She sold it to a family of shield
dwarves, who fell on hard times and sold it to a woman
who made it into an orphanage. “Turned out to be a hag
who was cooking and eating the children,” Ulkoria re-
calls. The estate passed through several more hands in
the years that followed. Ulkoria hopes the new owners
make something good of it.

Anytime she passes through the North Ward, Ulkoria
stops by the tavern for a drink and to check out the place
while her shield guardian waits outside. If she doesn't
like what the characters have done with the establish-
ment, she keeps her criticisms to herself. The characters
can hire her to cast glvphs of warding on the place, for
which she charges 300 gp apiece.

BuUSINESS RivAL: EMMEK FREWN

Emmek Frewn, a salty northerner (NE male [lluskan
commoner), recently tried to buy the tavern in Trollskull
Alley but was otitbid by Volothamp Geddarm. Stung by
the loss, he bought a smaller, less impressive building
in the same alley and turned it into a pub, which he calls
Frewn's Brews. If vou decide to introduce Emmek as a
business rival, choose an unmarked building on map 2.1
to serve as the pub.

Emmek’s family migrated to Waterdeep after its hold-
ings in Neverwinter were destroyed by the eruption of
Mount Hotenow in 1451 DR. The family struggled to
make ends meet by tanning leather in the Trades Ward.
After Emmek’s parents died, his sisters took over the
business and hought him out. He never liked the work
anyway, and he particularly hated dealing with the
League of Skinners and Tanners.

Emmek is on shaky financial footing because he has
sunk most of his wealth into this latest endeavor. He's
also in trouble with two of the guilds. First, he tried to
save coin by fixing the roof himself, in defiance of the
Carpenters’, Roofers’, and Plaisterers’ Guild. Then he of-

| fended a member of the Cellarers’ and Plumbers' Guild
| by comparing the dwarf’s beard to barnacles on a ship.

GOALS

Emmek wants his pub to be the most successful tavern
in the North Ward, and he wants the characters’ busi-
ness to fail spectacularly.

ASSETS

Emmek is stingy when it comes to certain kinds of ex-
penses and foolish with his coin in other ways. He tends
to spend a lot on big, showy items and cut corners on the
little amenities. Because he doesn't have much coin to

L CHAPTER 2 | TROLLSKULL ALLEY

throw around right now, his plan to ruin the characters’
establishment begins with borrowing some money.

PLANS
Emmek secures a 150 gp loan from Istrid Horn (see ap-
pendix B). He spends 50 gp for the services of the Shard
Shunners, a gang of halfling wererats with which he has
had nefarious dealings in the past. He pays the halflings
to hinder the characters’ efforts while he works fever-
ishly to manage his own business.

Four gang members have been assigned to work
with Emmek: two males named Kelso Fiddlewick and
Dasher Snobeedle, and two females named Danika Fid-
dlewick (Kelso's younger sister) and Brynn Hilltopple.
These halflings are wererats, with these changes:

+ Each wererat is Small and has 27 (6d6 + 6) hit points,

+ It has these racial traits: It can move through the
space of a Medium or larger creature. [t has advantage
on saving throws against being frightened. It speaks
Common and Halfling, and it knows thieves' cant.

Emmek’s strategy for ruining the competition and the
consequences for putting it into action are summarized

in the table below.

EMMEK'S PLANS

Element Description

Event The wererats scope out the characters’ tavern in
halfling forms and might try to get jobs there,

Event The wererats plant morsels of food inside the

characters' place and bore tiny holes in the out-
side walls to attract rats, creating an infestation.

Action Emmek spreads rumors that the characters’ tav-
ern is rat-infested, which is why he didn’t buy it.
Apply a =10 penalty on the next three rolls char-
acters make on the Running a Business table
(see “Tavern l{et'pin:g'Expeﬁﬁes," page 41).

Event The Shard Shunners claim they've done enough
for their coin and demand more.
Action Emmek pays the wererats another 50 gp to

creep around the characters’ tavern at night
in hybrid and rat form, carve rat faces into the
doors of neighbors, and otherwise draw atten-
tion to themselves.

Action Emmek convinces several local residents to sign
a letter he has drafted, then dispatches it to the
City Watch. The letter accuses the characters of
running a front for a guild of wererat thieves and
urges the Watch to close their establishment.

LEVEL ADVANCEMENT

In this section of the adventure, the characters should
advance to 3rd level by engaging in faction mis-

sions, dealing with Emmek Frewn, or partaking in
self-directed activities. This period of time represents an
opportunity for the characters to make friends and gain
a reputation (for good or ill) in Trollskull Alley—and in
Waterdeep itself—before the events of chapter 3 embroil
them in a greater plot.



@@@ 4 @@@



ESIDENTS OF TROLLSKULL ALLEY ARE SHAKEN
by a loud whoosh, rattling windows, and the
screams of city folk. A fireball spell has just
detonated in the street, and the neighborhood
is thrown into chaos. As members of the City
Guard, the City Watch, and the Watchful Order
of Magists and Protectors rush to the scene,
the characters are afforded a chance to assess the
damage and investigate further, This incident sets into
motion the main plot and puts the characters on a colli-
sion course with those who want to find and claim Lord
Neverember’s hidden cache of gold.

The fireball goes off early in the morning, at a time
when all the characters are in Trollskull Manor. Read
aloud the following text to set the scene:

Windows rattle as the roar of an explosion fills Trollskull

Alley. Charred bodies and anguished screams fly through
| the air. A thick cloud of acrid smoke billows outward

from the blast, which seems to have occurred right out-

side your door.

Let the players tell you what their characters are doing
at this moment and how they react to the explosion.
Those who want to guess the nature of the explosion
can, with a successful DC 13 Intelligence (Arcana)
check, conclude that someone just cast a fireball

spell outside.

—

WHAT'S HAPPENING HERE?

Dalakhar, a rock gnome spy working for Lord Dagult
Neverember, was on his way to see the characters when
the fireball went off, killing him and ten other people.
The gnome is important because he was carrying the
Stone of Golorr (see appendix A)—the key to finding
Lord Neverember's hidden cache of gold.

Hounded by agents of the Zhentarim, the Xanathar
Guild, and Bregan D’aerthe, Dalakhar was unable to
escape from Waterdeep with the artifact, so he planned
to entrust it to the characters briefly, for surely the folk
who rescued Lord Neverember's son could keep it safe
where he could not.

By the time the events of this chapter have played
out, the Stone of Golorr has changed hands a few times
and the characters have learned more about the big pic-
ture—though they still have a long chase ahead of them.

ZHENTS CAUGHT IN THE ACT

Three members of the Black Network, including the
Zhent assassin Urstul Floxin (see appendix B), were
close to nabbing Dalakhar when they were caught in the
blast. Of the three, only Urstul survived. Though he was
wounded, he was able to pluck the Stone of Golorr from
Dalakhar’s pocket before fleeing the scene. While other
survivors were coming to their senses, Urstul stumbled
through the smoke and haze and eventually made his
way back to Gralhund Villa a short distance away.



@@@ 5 @@@



HoOUSE GRALHUND b ]

The heads of the Gralhund noble family, Yalah Gralhund
and her husband, Orond, are providing coin and shel-
ter to Urstul and his fellow Zhents in exchange for the
promise of getting their fair share of the hidden cache
of gold. But the Gralhunds aren’t willing to put their
trust entirely in the Black Network; they sent out their
own agent to shadow the Zhents, eliminate Dalakhar,
and obtain the Stone of Golorr on their behalf. Yalah
gave the would-be assassin a necklace of fireballs with
instructions on how and when to use it. When it seemed
as though Dalakhar might give Urstul Floxin the slip,
this agent hurled one of the beads from the necklace to
stop the gnome in his tracks,

The Gralhunds’ assassin is a nimblewright (see
appendix B) that escaped from the House of Inspired
Hands, the temple of Gond in the Sea Ward, a month
ago. The construct hitched a ride on House Gralhund's
coach. Yalah Gralhund belriended it, offered it shelter,
and used it as a servant until she and her husband found
a more sinister use for it.

The incident with the fireball has strained the alliance
between the Gralhunds and the Black Network. Urstul
Floxin is refusing to hand over the Stone of Golorr until
he speaks to his secret master, Manshoon. Meanwhile,
the Gralhunds are weighing the risks of betraying and
murdering Urstul in their own house. If the characters’
investigation go well, they'll blunder into this den of
snakes before the chapter is done.

UNRAVELING THE PLOT

During their investigation, the characters should learn
who or what cast the fireball (a nimblewright), why the
attack was committed (to steal the Stone of Golorr), and
where the stone was taken (Gralhund Villa). If the inves-
tigation stalls, friendly NPCs might step forward to help
in exchange for compensation. One such figure is Vin-
cent Trench, the private detective, who lives in Trollskull
Alley (see chapter 2, area T5). The characters can also
consult with friendly factions such as the Harpers.

THE CRIME SCENE

In the wake of the explosion, people emerge from their
houses and shops to survey the devastation. The fire-
ball didn't set any buildings ablaze, but it left eleven
people dead:

« One elderly female human who was out for a walk (no
one recognizes her)

« Two cloaked male humans (Zhentarim sellswords)

clad in leather armor with sheathed longswords

Two female humans and one male half-elf dressed in

plain clothes (servants of wealthy North Ward fami-

lies, killed while running errands)

One male gnome (Dalakhar) wearing a burned cloak

and clutching a dagger

Two female halflings who were playing a flute and a

fiddle, and two male halflings who were dancing

The characters have only a few minutes to search
the crime scene before members of the City Guard ar-
rive. After that, they aren’t allowed anywhere near the

PCHAPTER 3 | FIREBALL

bodies, although invisible and similarly hidden charac-
ters can search the crime scene further. A search of the
bodies accompanied by a successful DC 15 Wisdom
(Perception) check reveals the following:

« One of the dead male humans has a black, winged
snake (the symbol of the Black Network) tattooed on
his right forearm.

+ The dead gnome has dry waste on his boots and
cloak, suggesting he has spent time in the sewers
recently. He also has a pouch containing five 100 gp
gemstones,

A character can try to snatch Dalakhar's pouch with-
out being seen by NPC onlookers, doing so with a suc-
cessful DC 13 Dexterity (Sleight of Hand) check. On a
failed check, the character still acquires the pouch, but
someone observes the theft and reports it to City Watch
constables once they show up (see “The Watch Arrives”
below). This witness to the theft can be silenced with a
bribe of 50 gp or more.

AFTER THE BLAST

The characters have a few minutes to examine the
crime scene before the City Guard arrives and cordons
off Trollskull Alley, posting six guards at each entrance.
The guards don’t allow anyone in or out without permis-
sion from a superior officer. Another six guards, includ-
ing a sergeant with 18 hit points, make their way to the
crime scene and watch over the dead bodies until the
City Watch arrives. Lingering smoke from the fireball
also attracts a Griffon Cavalry rider (see appendix B).
As its griffon mount circles the neighborhood, the rider
watches the streets and alleys for suspicious figures.

THE WATCH ARRIVES

Twenty minutes after the explosion, a City Watch ser-
geant named Saeth Cromley (see appendix B) escorts

a member of the Watchful Order of Magists and Protec-
tors named Barnibus Blastwind (see appendix B) to the
crime scene. Barnibus quietly takes charge of the inves-
tigation at that point, while Sergeant Cromley directs a
force of twenty constables (veterans) to knock on doors
and question locals.

Before allowing the corpses to be removed and taken
to local temples, Barnibus inspects the scene closely
and reaches the following conclusions, which he prefers
to keep to himself but might share with other members
of the Watchful Order:

« The gnome was running from armed pursuers, of
which there were three. The third person who was
chasing the gnome isn't among the dead.

« The gnome and his pursuers were moving toward the
tavern in Trollskull Alley (which Barnibus will soon
come to realize is the characters’ property).

« Neither the gnome nor his pursuers saw the
blast coming.

Given these findings, Barnibus decides to question
the tavern’'s owners and occupants, with Sergeant
Cromley by his side as a witness and bodyguard. Spe-
cifically, Barnibus wants to find out the gnome’s identity
and whether he was known to anyone. The characters,



@@@ 6 @@@



having never met Dalakhar, have little information to
offer uniess they decide to lie.

Neither Barnibus nor Sergeant Cromley is quick to
jump to conclusions. They both prefer to have ironclad
evidence and testimony from reliable witnesses before
making any arrests, Even though the characters are sus-
pects by virtue of their proximity to the crime scene, it
hardly seems plausible that they would unleash destruc-
tive magic so close to their place of business in broad
daylight. Consequently, Barnibus intends not to take up
too much of their time.

Barnibus and Sergeant Cromley refuse requests by
characters to join the investigation. “That would intro-
duce too many new variables into an already confound-
ing equation,” replies Barnibus with a frown. “Trust in
the Watch,” Cromley adds dismissively. Characters who
seem truthful and honest can press Barnibus for further
information by making a DC 15 Charisma (Persuasion)
check. On a success, they nudge Barnibus into revealing
what he has discovered, as outlined above,

EYEWITNESSES

Many other people witnessed the fireball without being
caught in the blast. Three of them have important infor-
mation to share. Any character who spends at least 1
minute talking to one of them [earns what that person
saw or heard. (No ability checks are required, since the
eyewitnesses are eager to talk.)

FALA LEFALIIR
Fala, the owner of Corellon’s Crown (see chapter 2, area
T4), relates the following information:

4 L
“| was watering plants in the greenhouse on the second
floor of my shop when the blast blew out some of the
windows. Lucky | wasn't injured! Through the smoke,
[ saw a cloaked man take something from the body of

a dead gnome, then start limping away. He was badly
burned and casting glances over his shoulder, like he was
afraid someone might be following him. He was headed
l toward the Bent Nail."

Fala saw Urstul Floxin fleeing the scene with the Stone
of Golorr in his clutches. He circled around the Bent
Nail (see chapter 2, area T2) on his way out of Troll-
skull Alley.

JEZRYNNE HORNRAVEN

A Waterdavian born of wealth and privilege, Jezrynne
was leaving the Tiger's Eye (see chapter 2, area T5), hav-
ing just hired Vincent Trench to spy on her philandering
husband, when she witnessed the following:

4
“I tell you, it was not a man. More like a puppet shaped T
like a man. A puppet without strings. it was on the

rooftop. It hurled something into the crowd below that
caused the explosion. | saw thase halflings burned alive!

| | saw them!”

! 4

‘l "~

SAETH CromLEY AND Barpnigus BLasTwiIND

Jezrynne doesn't know what the “puppet” hurled to
cause the fireball. She took her eyes off the thing during
the chaos and doesn't know where it went.

MARTEM TREC

This 12-year-old boy watched as his halfling friends per-
ished in the flames. He didn't see much bevond that, but
he found something important after the blast went off:

P »
“Right after the explosion, | ducked behind a rain barrel.

Then | heard a ‘plop’ and found this in the barrel.”
[ L

Martem produces a necklace of fireballs with two beads
remaining and a broken clasp. As it fled across a roof-
top, the nimblewright accidentally yanked on the neck-
lace, which came off, fell to the roof, slid off the edge,
and plopped into the rain barrel next to Martem.

He doesn't know what to make of this object but was
planning to keep it. A character can snatch it from him
or convince Martem to relinquish it with a successful
DC 8 Charisma (Intimidation or Persuasion) check.

Characters who withhold the necklace, and knowi-
edge of it, from the City Watch are guilty of a crime in
Waterdeep. Hampering justice by concealing evidence
can result in a fine of up to 200 gp and hard labor for up
to a tenday.

)
a

A

CHAPTER 3 | FIREBALL



@@@ 7 @@@



SPEAKING WITH THE VICTIMS

The dead are taken to a City Watch station in the North
Ward and kept in a cellar morgue. Clerics from local
temples are brought in to cast gentle repose spells on
the corpses, to preserve them while the investigation is
ongoing. Any character who has a renown of 1 or higher
in Force Grey (the Gray Hands), the Harpers, the Lords’
Alliance, the Order of the Gauntlet, or the Zhentarim
can petition their faction representative to hire a cleric
to cast speak with dead on one or more of the fatalities.
The characters can hire a cleric themselves by making
a donation of at least 25 gp to the cleric's temple for
each casting of the spell. They must also provide a list of
questions they want answered.

A speak with dead spell can pry some or all of the fol-
lowing information from Dalakhar’s corpse if the right
questions are asked:

+ Dalakhar stole an artifact called the Stone of Golorr
from the lair of a beholder known as Xanathar, in a
dungeon deep below the city.

« Dalakhar worked for the Open Lord of Waterdeep.
(Here he refers to Lord Dagult Neverember, whom
he believes is the rightful Open Lord, not Laeral
Silverhand.)

« The Stone of Golorr is the key to finding a hoard of
dragons hidden in the city.

+ Dalakhar heard about a group of adventurers who
rescued Lord Neverember's son from the Zhentarim
and thought the Stone of Golorr would be safe in their
hands for the time being. He was on his way to deliver
it to them, planning to come back and reclaim it after
he had eluded his pursuers. Then the fireball went off.

The following information can be learned by casting
speak with dead on one or both of the dead Zhentarim
sellswords:

« Their names were Bashekk Ortallis and Wern
Malkrave. They worked for Urstul Floxin and resided
at Gralhund Villa.

« Their job was to help catch a gnome named Dalakhar.

« Dalakhar had some kind of artifact in his possession
which, according to Urstul Floxin, would make them
as rich as kings.

NIM’'S SECRET

Characters who question Jezrynne Hornraven (see “Eye-
witnesses” above) can get a description of the creature
that set off the fireball. It bears a striking similarity to
the automatons that sometimes march in the Day of
Wonders parade, as anyone who has lived in Waterdeep
during the fall season knows. Because the Day of Won-
ders parade is sponsored by the local temple of Gond,
characters might want to visit the temple and investigate
a possible connection.

HouUSE OF INSPIRED HANDS

The House of Inspired Hands, Waterdeep’s temple of
Gond, sits on the corner of Seawatch Street and Shark
Street in the Sea Ward. If the characters visit the tem-
ple, they see the following:

CHAPTER 3 | FIREBALL

The House of Inspired Hands looks like a cross be-
tween a temple and a workshop. The symbol of Gond, a
toothed cog with four spokes, is displayed prominently.
You see the silhouette of a humanoid shape perching

on the rooftop. It extends an arm, releasing a tiny metal
sparrow into the sky. The bird does a few loops in the air,
then veers right toward you,

The creature atop the temple is Nim, a nimblewright
(see appendix B). Nim was given to the temple as a gift
from a visiting Lantanese wizard and has been creating
its own inventions on the sly, One of those inventions
was the nimblewright that detonated the fireball in
Trollskull Alley. Another less-dangerous invention, a
mechanical sparrow, is on an accidental collision course
with the party.

Have the characters roll initiative. Nim's mechanical
bird acts on initiative count 10, has a flying speed of 60
feet, and starts 60 feet away from the characters. It has
AC 15, 1 it point, and immunity to peison and psychic
damage. On its turn, it flies toward one party member
at random and makes a melee weapon attack (+0 to hit)
against that character. On a hit, the bird deals 2 (1d3)
piercing damage as it slams into the character with
surprising force. On a miss, it crashes. Either way, it's
destroyed on impact.

After the attack, Nim withdraws into the temple’s attic
through a secret hatch in the roof and lies low, hoping
the characters don't report the incident to the tem-
ple’s acolytes.

INSIDE THE TEMPLE

The temple of Gond is open and abuzz with activity
during daylight hours. then closes from sunset until sun-
rise. At night, acolytes retire to their private quarters fo
work on pet projects,

HALL OF EXEMPLARY INVENTIONS

The main hall of the temple holds two dozen marble
pedestals. Each one bears a prize-winning invention or
a miniature model of some other extraordinary creation.
Among the displays are several that stand out:

+ A 4-foot-tall working model of a clock tower rings at
the top of every hour. It is made of wood, iron, bronze,
and glass, with brass bells and delicate hands formed
from solid gold.

+ A wooden flying machine has wings that flap when it
becomes airborne.

« A miniature model of a mechanical dragon turtle has
a brass plate affixed to its pedestal that reads, “Big
Belchy. Sank in Deepwater Harbor on the Day of
Wonders in 1363 DR.”

+ A functional "waking helmet” equipped with small,
articulated metal arms and hands that gently slap the
wearer if he or she falls asleep.

+ A miniature model of a red submarine shaped like a
manta ray has a brass plate affixed to its pedestal that
reads, “The Scarlet Marpenoth. Lantanese submers-
ible. Launched in 1489 DR."



@@@ 8 @@@



MEETING VALETTA
The characters are met by Valetta, a dragonborn priest
of bronze dragon ancestry, with these changes:

« Valetta is neutral.

» She has these racial traits: She can use her action to
exhale a 5-foot-wide, 30-foot line of lightning (but can't
do this again until she finishes a short or long rest);
each creature in the line must make a DC 11 Dexterity
saving throw, taking 2d6 lightning damage on a failed
save, or half as much damage on a successful one,
She has resistance to lightning damage. She speaks
Common and Draconic.

If the characters mention the figure they saw on
the roof of the temple, Valetta identifies it as Nim, a
nimblewright that was gifted to the temple by a Lan-
tanese wizard. If they describe the incident involving
the mechanical bird, Valetta sighs and leads them up a
spiral staircase to an attic that Nim uses as a lair—only
to find the attic’s door fitted with a new lock. Valetta
doesn't recognize the lock or have a key to open it. but
a character using thieves’ tools can pick the lock with
a successful DC 20 Dexterity check. A knock spell or
similar magic also opens the door. Valetta won't allow
characters to break down the door, but she does permit
them to speak to Nim through the door. A character can
persuade Nim to unlock the door with a successful DC
17 Charisma (Persuasion) check. Valetta grants advan-
tage on the roll by strongly urging Nim to comply.

MEETING NIM
Nim understands Common but can't speak. It has de-
veloped a simple sign language that Valetta and other
members of the temple staff understand. After the inci-
dent with the bird, Nim hides amid the clutter in its lair,
but it emerges if the characters find their way inside or
coax it into unlocking the door. If the characters ask
about the other nimblewright, Nim admits (through ges-
turing to Valetta) that it built the other nimblewright to
ease its loneliness. But then Nim's creation fled in con-
fused terror a month ago, and Nim hasn't seen it since.
In light of this revelation, Valetta angrily orders acolytes
to remove Nim's tools and unfinished inventions from
the attic, while she forces Nim to look on.
Nimblewright Detector. Characters who search
Nim's attic or watch the area as it's being cleaned oul
can find a 1-foot-long copper contraption with an um-
brella-like metallic protrusion at one end. A derect magic
spell reveals an aura of divination magic around it. If
asked about it, Nim tells Valetta that it built this device
to find the errant nimblewright and tried to seek it out,
only to discover that Nim couldn’t leave the temple
grounds. Once Nim explains how the nimblewright de-
tector works, Valetta allows the characters to take it.
To activate the nimblewright detector, a character
must hold down its trigger. When the activated device
comes within 500 feet of a nimblewright other than
Nim, the umbrella begins to spin, whir, and click. The
spinning, whirring, and clicking accelerates as the dis-
tance to the target lessens, reaching maximum velocity
and volume when a nimblewright other than Nim is
within 30 feet of the device.

NimaLEwriGHT DETECTOR

REWARD

If the characters want to track down the wayward nim-
blewright themselves, Valetta says that the House of In-
spired Hands will pay them 500 gp to destroy it. If they
return with proof of its destruction, Valetta sees that
they receive the promised reward and also offers them
one each of the following nonmagical inventions:

Adjustable Stilts. The stilts take 1 minute to put on
or remove. They increase the height of any humanoid
wearing them by 2 to 5 feet. Each stilt weighs 8 pounds
and is 1 foot long when fully collapsed.

Backpack Parachute. A humanoid wearing this piece
of gear can deploy the parachute as a reaction while fall-
ing, or as an action otherwise. The parachute requires
at least a 10-foot cube of unoccupied space in which to
deploy, and it doesn't open fast enough to slow a fall of
less than 60 feet. If it has sufficient time and space to
deplov properly, the parachute allows its wearer to land
without taking falling damage. Once it has been used,
the parachute takes 10 minutes to repack.

Barking Box. This metal cube, 6 inches on a side,
has a crank on top. Using an action to wind the crank
activates the box for 8 hours. While activated, the box %
barks whenever it detects vibrations within 15 feet of it, .
as long as the box and the source of the vibrations are in r"
contact with the same ground or substance. A switch on j
one side of the box sets the device to emit either a small /
dog’s bark or a large dog’s bark.

d

CHAPTER 3 | FIREBALL



@@@ 9 @@@



CHAPITER 3

FIRI

BALIL

JARLAXLE DAENRE

Matchless Pipe. A switch made of flint is built into the
bowl of this fine wooden smoking pipe. With a few flicks
of the switch, the pipe lights itself.

FINDING NIM'S CREATION

Equipped with the nimblewright detector, the characters
can search for Nim's escaped creation. A ward-by-ward
search is the best approach, but let the players tell you
how their characters conduct the search. Depending on
where they go, the search could take days.

A character mounted on a griffon can complete a
city-wide search in a couple of hours. To secure the
use of a griffon, a character must either be a member
of the Order of the Gauntlet on good terms with Savra
Belabranta or a member of the Lords’ Alliance on good
terms with Jalester Silvermane. As it happens, a young
griffon named Bonesnapper is being trained to serve
as a mount 1n the Grifton Cavalry. If Savra or Jalester is
inclined to help the party, the characters can arrange to
meet the griffon and its trainer outside the River Gate
the following morning shortly after dawn. (The griffon
and its trainer normally reside in Peaktop Aerie atop
Mount Waterdeep, but most civilians aren't welcome
there.) To gain Bonesnapper's trust, a character must
succeed on a DC 16 Wisdom (Animal Handling) check.
The griffon won't allow any character who fails the
check to ride it.

Nim's errant nimblewright is in Gralhund Villa on
Saerdoun Street, in the North Ward. It isn't, however,
the only nimblewright to be found outside the House
of Inspired Hands. 1f the characters decide to search
the Dock Ward, the nimblewright detector starts to
whir when it comes within range of a couple of the
ships in port.

DocK WARD DISTRACTION

Zardoz Zord. owner of the Sea Maidens Faire, has
brought his three ships to Waterdeep. Two of these gal-
leons, the Heartbreaker and the Hellraiser, are docked.
Zord’s flagship, the Eyecatcher, is anchored in Deepwa-
ter Harbor. Each of the three ships (described in chapter
7) has at least one nimblewright aboard.

The docks are bustling and chaotic during the day,
except in winter. At night, darkness provides sufficient
cover for characters to approach the docked vessels
unseen. If one or more characters are caught aboard a
ship, the crew tries (o corner them until the ship's cap-
tain can have words with them. The nimblewrights, they
say, are “attractions and nothing more.” If the characters
ask to speak to the owner of the fleet, a sending spell is
used to contact Zord, who invites the characters to dine
with him aboard the Eyecatcher.

Dining with Zardoz Zord. Characters who accept
Zord's offer are shuttled by dinghy to his flagship,
welcomed aboard by drow crew members magically
disguised as attractive humans (see chapter / for more
information), and led to the captain's dining cabin

(area ]10):



@@@ 10 @@@



The dining cabin is bedecked with golden filigree, the
purple curtains festooned with silken tassels, the wood
paneling scented with perfume. A magnificent feast laid
out on golden platters sprawls atop a mahogany table of
exquisite craftsmanship. Even the doilies are something
to behold. Standing behind it all with wine glass in hand
is a well-built, scantily clad man, his scarlet apparel de-
signed to accentuate his trim figure and bountiful chest
hair. A flashy rapier hangs from his stylish belt.
“Welcome aboard the Eyecatcher,” he says, flashing his

pearly white teeth. “Zardoz Zord, at your service.”
| B

This dashing figure is none other than Jarlaxle Baenre
(see appendix B) magically disguised as Zardoz Zord.

The characters have piqued Jarlaxle's curiosity. He
doesn't know much about them (yvet) and wants to de-
termine whether they pose a threat (they don't). To win
them over, he shares the following information over din-
ner and wine:

+ The Sea Maidens Faire, owned and operated by Zord,
is a seafaring carnival based in Luskan that travels
along the Sword Coast. It provides good, wholesome
entertainment in the form of fantastic street parades,

« The Heartbreaker and the Hellraiser are used to
transport entertainers, wagons, and parade floats. The
Evecatcher is Zord's command ship and private yacht.
All three ships are built for comfort and speed.

+ Zord visits the distant island of Lantan about once
a vear. During his last visit, he purchased four nim-
blewrights from a Lantanese wizard. He keeps two
aboard his flagship, and one aboard each of the other
two vessels.

« When they're not marching in a parade, Zord's
nimblewrights remain aboard his ships. “They're
perfectly harmless,” he attests, whereupon a
nimblewright holding a decanter enters the dining
cabin and quietly refills everyone's wine glasses.

If the characters mention the Stone of Golorr, Zord
shrugs his shoulders in a manner that suggests he
doesn't know what they're talking about. He also feigns
disinterest in Waterdeep politics, saying, “Every city
has problems, | suppose. My job as an entertainer is
to make people forget about politics for a while.” Char-
acters who are suspicious of Zord can make a DC 24
Wisdom (Insight) check. Any character who succeeds
on the check senses that there's much more to him than
meets the eye.

Jarlaxle owns a hat of disguise but doesn't need it to
hide his true form while he’s aboard any of his ships.
His disguise (and the disguises of his drow subordi-
nates) can be dispelled only by destroying the ship’s
figurehead (see chapter 7). If the characters somehow
discern his true form, Jarlaxle gives the party a slow nod
of his head, dryly says “Bravo!"” and lets them make the
next move.

When dinner is concluded, Zord bids the characters
farewell and sees that they are escorted safely back to
the docks.

DrOW CHARACTERS

If the adventuring party includes one or more drow
characters, Captain Zord pays close attention to what
they do and say, but doesn't treat them any differently
from the other party members.

WHAT RENAER KNOWS

At some point during their investigation, the characters
might want to speak to Renaer Neverember about the
fireball, given his own recent brush with the Zhentarim.
Conversely, he could decide to pay them a visit at their
tavern. If he's told that a gnome and two Zhents were
killed in the blast, Renaer drops a hombshell:

1 '
“When the Lords of Waterdeep ousted my father, |
thought his long, dark shadow was finally gone for good.
The truth is, | want nothing to do with him. But his spies
hound me. One of them, a gnome named Dalakhar, had
been watching me for months. Then, about two tendays
ago, the spy was suddenly nowhere to be seen. My father
didn't trust many people, but he trusted that gnome.

“I spoke to a few of Dalakhar’s friends. Apparently, he
was on a special mission to retrieve the Stone of Golorr
and was afraid that the Zhentarim and the Xanathar
Guild were close to catching him. When he heard about
my kidnapping, he wanted more information about the
adventurers who had rescued me. | think Dalakhar was
planning to pay you to deliver the Stone of Golorr to my

father in Neverwinter.”
+ L

Any attempt to follow up with Dalakhar’s friends proves
futile, since they have gone into hiding in the wake of the
gnome's sudden demise.

If the characters tell Renaer that Fala Lefaliir saw a
man fleeing Trollskull Alley (see “Eyewitnesses,” page
45), Renaer reaches out to his friends in the Harpers.

A day later, he returns with the following information:

« The man Fala saw matches the description of Urstul
Floxin, a suspected member of the Black Network.

+ Another North Ward resident claims he saw Urstul
enter Gralhund Villa, in the North Ward, shortly after
the fireball incident, The resident reported him to the
City Watch because Urstul looked suspicious.

» Two City Watch constables spoke to Lord Gralhund.
He assured them that no one had broken into the
estate and that everything was fine. The constabies
had no grounds to get a search warrant, so they didn't
pursuye the matter.



@@@ 11 @@@



GRALHUND VILLA

After fleeing Trollskull Alley with the Stone of Golorr in
his clutches, the Zhent assassin Urstul Floxin returned

to Gralhund Villa to confront Yalah Gralhund about
sending the nimblewright to meddle in his mission.
Lady Gralhund decides she no longer likes Urstul and,
taking advantage of his injuries, wrests the Stone of

Golorr from him at swordpoint and orders her guards to

lock him up until she decides what to do with him.

Your choice of main villain determines Lady Gral-
hund's motivation, which is a secret held by her and
Hrabbaz, her loyal half-orc bodvguard:

- If Xanathar is the main villain, Yalah Gralhund has se-
cretly cut a deal with the beholder crime lord, offering
to return the Stone of Golorr to it if the beholder helps
her create a vacancy on the council of Masked Lords.

« If the Cassalanters are the main villains, Yalah is a
fawning member of their Asmodeus-worshiping cult

and intends to deliver the Stone of Golorr to them as a

demonstration of her fealty and friendship.,
+ If Jarlaxle is the main villain, he and Yalah are secret

lovers. He has promised to facilitate her rise in power

after he uses Lord Neverember's lost hoard to buy
Luskan's way into the Lords' Alliance.

« If Manshoon is the main villain, he promised not to
destroy Yalah's family if she allowed her villa to be
used as a staging area for his secret plots. Believing
that Urstul Floxin is after the gold for himself, Yalah
plans to cut Urstul out of the deal and deliver the
Stone of Golorr to Manshoon herself.

Having gravely misjudged and underestimated Lady
Grallund once, Urstul isn't about to do so again. Ral-
lving despite his injuries, he manages to kill the two
inattentive Gralhund guards who were watching over

him and alert the other Zhents on the estate, who begin
dispatching the other guards and servants. Urstul's goal

is to capture Lord or Lady Gralhund, force the surren-
der of the Stone of Golorr, and deliver it to his master
Manshoon in Kolat Towers (described in chapter 8).
Urstul's plans—unbeknownst to him—are dashed
when Lady Gralhund orders her nimblewright to take

the Stone of Golorr elsewhere. Amid the chaos, the nim-

blewright flees the estate.

SHoOULD THEY OR SHOUL_DN"T THEY?

The characters must proceed carefully, since they have

no evidence that directly implicates the Gralhunds in

the attack in Trollskull Alley. Their two basic choices

are to share what they know with the City Watch or to
visit Gralhund Villa themselves,

LET THE WATCH HANDLE IT

The characters can go to any City Watch station in the
North Ward and report what they have learned to the
constables there. Shortly thereafter, the characters
receive a visit from Barnibus Blastwind and Saeth
Cromley (see appendix B), who have no reason to sus-
pect the characters are lying. Their own investigation
corroborates much of what the characters said. Barni-
bus concludes the meeting by saying, rather brusquely,

“HAPTER 3 | FIREBALL

“Thank you for the information.” Cromley adds, “Rest
assured, we'll have this case resolved in no time.”

A magistrate provides the City Watch with a warrant
to search Gralhund Villa. Sometime afterward, Cromley
visits the characters by himself and, as a courtesy, tells
them what happened:

+ Officers arrived to find Lord Gralhund unconscious,
Lady Gralhund in shock, and their half-orc bodyguard
bloodied but unbowed.

« Apparently, the Gralhunds had been held hostage for
more than a tenday by agents of the Black Network,
Most of the Zhents were killed during a bloody revolt
led by Lord Gralhund himself.

+ The Zhent leader, Urstul Floxin, was among those
who got away. He's still at large. The Watch plans to
step up its search for him.

« Of the nimblewright, there was no sign. According
to the Gralhunds, the construct was delivered to
Gralhund Villa weeks earlier. The family took it in,
not realizing it was a Zhentarim spy. Lady Gralhund
reported that it stole her necklace of fireballs.

Cromley's summary of events is based on information
given to the City Watch by the Gralhunds and is riddled
with falsehoods. The hostage situation, Lord Gralhund's
heroism, and the theft of Lady Gralhund’s necklace of
fireballs never happened. The nimblewright’s affiliation
with the Zhentarim is also a lie. The Gralhunds' account
further doesn’t explain why the nimblewright would use
the necklace of fireballs to inflict harm on the Zhents if
it was working with them. If characters raise that ques-
tion, Cromley thinks for a moment and then ventures
the guess that the nimblewright underestimated the
necklace's explosive power.

INVESTIGATE THE VILLA

The characters can insert themselves into Gralhund
Villa and accost its residents with impunity if they're
careful to pin the violence on the Zhents or if they're
able to enter and leave unseen before the City Watch
shows up to arrest everyone,

Sneaking in or out of the villa without being seen or
heard by neighbors and passersby requires each char-
acter to succeed on a DC 15 Dexterity (Stealth) check.
A character who has proficiency in the Stealth skill can
take disadvantage on the check to grant advantage on
another party member’s check (essentially compensat-
ing for a less stealthy companion).

[f the characters side with the Gralhunds in the con-
flict, Lady Gralhund is inclined to overlook their tres-
pass. Her demeanor sours, however, if they start asking
too many questions. She vigorously denies accusations
that her family is involved with the Black Network and
claims the Zhents were holding her family hostage (a
false claim also parroted by her husband, her body-
guard, her children, and her staft). If the characters as-
sault any member of the household or brandish weapons
in an attempt to intimidate, the Gralhunds inform the
City Watch of the party’s crimes.

During the characters’ invasion of Gralhund Villa, the
nimblewright flees the estate with the Stone of Golorr
(see chapter 4 for more information on its destination). If



@@@ 12 @@@







@@@ 13 @@@



the characters are using Nim's nimblewright detector to
track the nimblewright, the device lets them know that
the nimblewright has fled the scene, but not the direc-
tion it went.

OVERVIEW

Gralhund Villa sits in the middle of an upper-class resi-
dential neighborhood in the North Ward. Here are some
general facts to keep in mind:

. The streets around the villa have pedestrians and
coaches traveling along them at all hours, though traf-
fic is heavier during the day.

+ The estate is enclosed by 12-foot-high stone walls that
require a successful DC 15 Strength (Athletics) check
to negotiate without the aid of climbing gear or magic.

« Neighbors and bystanders alert the City Watch if they
hear loud, disturbing noises (such as a thunderwave
spell) coming from the estate or if they see anything
suspicious. The Watch sends a mage and six veterans
(one sergeant and five constables) to investigate, and it
takes 1d6 + 4 minutes for this force to arrive.

« All ceilings in the mansion are 20 feet high.

ENCOUNTERS IN THE VILLA

The following encounter locations, keyed to map 3.1,
describe the Gralhund estate as it stands when the char-
acters first arrive. The Zhents have taken over the down-
stairs level of the mansion; the Gralhunds are fighting to
hold the upstairs,

Gl. LOCKED GATES

Through a set of ornate iron gates, the characters can
see a yard with several large trees, as well as two foot-
paths that lead to a two-story brick mansion and east-
ward toward a detached coach house.

An arcane lock spell is cast on the gates. Forcing them
open requires a successful DC 25 Strength (Athletics)
check, while picking the lock requires a successful
DC 20 Dexterity check using thieves' tools. The spell
doesn’t bar members of the Gralhund family, their staff,
their guards, or Lady Gralhund’s nimblewright from
opening the gates.

G2. YARD

The estate is well tended. In spring and summer, large
trees provide shade. The trees begin shedding leaves in
the fall. By winter, their branches are stripped bare.

Balcony. Through the trees, the characters can see
a large balcony (area (G17) enclosed by an iron railing
above the mansion’s main entrance. The balcony is
20 feet above ground level, and scaling the mansion's
brick walls to reach it without the aid of climbing gear
Of Mmagic requires a successiul DC 15 Strength (Athlet-
ics) check.

Evil Groundskeeper. The vard is looked after by a
menacing groundskeeper named Hurv Taldred (LE
male [lluskan cult fanatic) and his two quiet mastiffs.
The Gralhunds paid a necromancer to perform a ritual
on Hurv and his mastiffs. After sundown, the physical
forms of these figures melt away, and they become three
shadows until dawn. Characters who succeed on a DC

CHAPTER 3 | FIREBALL

13 Dexterity (Stealth) check can cross the vard without
being detected, Otherwise, Hurv and his hounds detect
the characters and attack, day or night.

G3. CoAcH HOUSE

This stone building contains a beautifully maintained
coach and clean stables that house four draft horses
and Lady Gralhund’s jet-black riding horse, named
Maladar. A sliding wooden door bars access to the
street and has a padlock on the outside that holds it
shut. Picking the lock requires a successful DC 20 Dex-
terity check using thieves’ tools.

The larger room north of the stables contains tack
and harness for each horse, as well as bales of hay and
vard tools. The smaller room in the northwest corner
has two cots: one for the groundskeeper, Hurv (see area
(G2), who sleeps during the day, and one for a stableboy
named lke (commoner), who sleeps here at night. [ke is
away (either picking up food for the horses or out drink-
ing with friends) if the characters arrive during the day.

Treasure. Lady Gralhund's horse is outfitted with
horseshoes of speed and two saddlebags, each of which
holds four 5-pound gold trade bars worth 250 gp each.

G4. GUARD BARRACKS

This one-story stone building attached to the mansion
serves as quarters for twenty house guards. The main
room contains ten bunk beds. Each comes with a pair
of footlockers containing folded clothes and worthless
personal effects.

The room in the northwest corner contains wooden
mannequins and racks designed to hold armor and
weapons. Since there are no guards present, the manne-
quins and racks are bare.

G5. KITCHEN

An unlocked wooden door leads from the yard to the
mansion's kitchen, which is stocked with cookware and
utensils. A large fireplace is used for cooking meals.

G6. PANTRY
This pantry is lined with shelves containing dry food-
stuffs, spices, folded tablecloths, and jars of preserves,
Casks of fresh water, ale, and wine are also stored here.
Barred Door. A back door leads out to the street. This
sturdy wooden door is barred shut on the inside. Forc-
ing it open from the outside requires a successful DC 20
Strength (Athletics) check and makes a lot of noise.
Corpses. The Zhents have killed two servants, an
older male human (the head butler) and a younger male
halfling (a cook), and left their bodies on the floor.

G7. LAUNDRY ROOM

This room is where servants wash clothing. It con-
tains scrub buckets, wash basins, scap, mops, and
chamber pots.

Corpses. The Zhents have killed a servant, a mid-
dle-aged female human (the head maid), and left her
body on the stairs leading up to the servants’ quarters
(area G19). The maid has a ring of keys on her belt that
opens all the locked doors in the mansion as well as the
cabinets in area G8.



@@@ 14 @@@



G8. GReAT HALL

Characters who enter this hall for the first time notice
the following:

+ The floor is strewn with bodies. Two thugs holding
bloody maces stand over them.

+ The sound of fighting can be heard coming from the
top of a wide staircase in the northwest corner (see
area (G13).

« Two iron chandeliers hang from the dark mahogany
ceiling above a long dining table carved from red
larchwood. Chairs surround the table, with a particu-
larly tall and elaborate chair at each end.

« Lining the wood-paneled walls are tapestries and
locked wooden cabinets that contain fine dishes, sil-
verware, and candlesticks.

- A fireplace with a black marble mantelpiece has a
framed family portrait mounted above it. (The portrait
depicts Lord and Lady Gralhund, their three young
children, and a family dog that died three years ago.)

Corpses. Lying about the room are the bodies of eight
guards wearing bloody and tattered House Gralhund
livery over their chain shirts, as well as two dead Zhents
in black leather armor. All are humans.

Thugs. The two figures with maces are Zhents clad in
black leather armor. Their orders are to hold the room.
They attack strangers, including members of the City
Watch, on sight. They carry no treasure,

G9. PARLOR
Urstul Floxin was confined here when he returned to
the villa, but shortly thereafter he killed his guards and
escaped. The room is furnished for comfort and con-
tains dainty chairs, a chaise longue, a wine cabinet, and
framed paintings of various long-dead members of the
Gralhund family.

Corpses. The bodies of the two guards lie atop blood-
soaked rugs. The guards wear chain shirts and the liv-
ery of House Gralhund.

G10. DEN AND TROPHY ROOM
Lord Gralhund’s den has the heads of various beasts
mounted on the walls and gleaming suits of armor
standing at attention in the corners, Bearskin rugs and
overstuffed chairs fill the room.

Lord Gralhund recently took up falconry as a hobby.
In the middle of the room, resting on a table, is a cage
containing a hooded falcon (use hawk statistics).

Gll. OrROND'S STUDY

The door to this room is locked. The lock can be picked
by a character who makes a successful DC 15 Dexterity
check using thieves tools. The room has these features:

« A 10-foot-square canvas wrestling mat is sprawled on
the floor in the middle of the room.

. Velvet armchairs, small statues of naked men on ped-
estals, and tall mahogany bookshelves are arranged
neatly around the room.

- A mahogany desk in one corner doesn't look like it
sees much use.

Books, Most of the books are fake boxes made of
painted cardboard. A few have bawdy drawings and sa-
lacious poems hidden inside them.

G12. FAMILY LIBRARY
The wood-paneled library includes these features:

« Tall bookshelves are packed with tomes. Sliding
wooden ladders mounted on rails allow easy access to
higher shelves,

« In one corner stands an iron lectern with a closed,
locked, leather-bound tome resting on it.

« Two padded chairs face a large fireplace. One has a
wolf skin draped over it.

Books. Many of the books were handed down to Lady
Gralhund by her parents, and they are well kept. They
include historical texts, play scripts, novels, and poetry
collections.

Locked Tome. Although it looks like it might be a
spellbook, the tome on the lectern is a chronicle of the
Gralhund family’s accomplishments, embellished or
recast to paint the family in the most favorable light. A
detect magic spell reveals an aura of abjuration magic
emanating from the tome.

The tome is meant to be unlocked using a key that
Lady Gralhund wears on a chain around her neck. The
lock can be picked by a character who succeeds on a
DC 15 Dexterity check using thieves’ tools, or it can be
opened with a knock spell or similar magic. Opening
the book by any means other than using the proper key
causes three specters to appear within 10 feet of the
book and attack its opener. The magic that binds the
specters has weakened over time; they can exist on the
Material Plane for only 1 minute, after which time they
are banished to the Ethereal Plane (unless destroyed
first). The specters manifest as ghostly tieflings with
elongated fingers.

The Gralhund family crest appears on the book’s title
page. The rest of the book is written in Common and de-
seribes births, deaths, and other family events between
1239 DR, the Year of the Bloodied Sword, and 1422
DR, the Year of Advancing Shadows. Of particular note
is the little-known fact that the Gralhunds forged pacts
with devils in years past, giving rise to a strain of tief-
lings. All such members of the house were sent to live
on a Gralhund estate in Yartar, a city far to the north (or
so the book claims in its epilogue), and there are pass-
ing references to some Waterdavian family members
having been born with tails.

G13. UpsTAIRS FOYER
A lot is happening in this elegant foyer:

« A battle rages between several Zhents and house
guards, and the floor is strewn with dead bodies.

« Doors to the master bedroom (area (G16) stand open. Y
(If Lady Gralhund is in the master bedroom, she
shouts, “The City Watch is on the way!”)

« The door to area G15a is ajar. Beyond it, characters
can hear someone putting a hoot to another door.

Corpses. Lying on the floor are the corpses and weap-
ons of six guards wearing House Gralhund livery over
chain shirts and two Zhents in black leather armor.

CHAPTER 3 | FIREBALL 8



@@@ 15 @@@



UpstuL FLoxin

Fight in Progress. Four veterans of House Gralhund
(each with 30 hit points remaining) are fighting off an

attacking force of Zhents consisting of three thugs (each

with 20 hit points remaining). The Zhents are trving to
get to area (516, but the guards are blocking them.

[f the characters do nothing to affect the outcome of
this hght, assume that it ends with three House Gral-
hund veterans still alive and all the Zhents dead.

Gl4. BALLROOM

The door to this room is locked. A character using
thieves' tools can pick the lock with a successful DC 15
Dexterity check. The ballroom is unoccupied and con-
tains the following features:

+ Gilded mirrors, tasseled tapestries, and stained-glass
lamps festoon the walls. Mounted above a fireplace is
a stag s head made of blown glass,

+ The veined marble floor is polished to a mirror-
like sheen.

« Tacky crystal chandeliers dangle from the ceiling,
which has a mural depicting an orgy painted on it.

G15, GUEeSsT SUITE
Until recently, this suite was set aside for the use of
Urstul Floxin. Lord Gralhund has barricaded himself
in area G15b, using heavy furniture to block the door.
Farcing it open requires a successful DC 18 Strength
(Athletics) check.

The characters encounter Urstul Floxin (see ap-
pendix B) in area G15a. Urstul is wounded with 50 hit

MHAPTER 5 | FIREBALIL

points remaining and has no poison coating his weap-
ons, reducing his challenge rating to 3 (/00 XP). He's
trying to Kick open the door to area (x15b in a desperate
attempt to capture Lord Gralhund and trade him for

the Stone of Golorr. If he is accosted before reaching
Lord Gralhund, Urstul tries to flee the villa and uses any
other surviving Zhents to cover his escape. He knows
the same information that Lord Gralhund does (see
“Orond Gralhund” below) but won't divulge it or the
name of his master, Manshoon, unless he's magically
compelled to do so.

Area (G15a is a bathroom. A curtain to the east has
been drawn back, revealing a claw-footed bathtub,

Area (G15b is a wood-paneled bedchamber with a bird-
cage on a table and a permanent teleportation circle in-
scribed on the floor. The birdcage contains three flying
snakes that Urstul uses to deliver messages to his spies
throughout the city. The circle is used by Manshoon to
meet secretly with Urstul Floxin and to teleport Zhents
to and from Kolat Towers (see chapter 8). See the tele
portation circle spell description in the Player's Hand-
book for more information on how the circle functions.

Orond Gralhund. Having blocked the bedroom door
with a wardrobe, a desk, and an overstuffed chair,
Orond Gralhund (see appendix B) cowers behind a bed
in the southwest corner of area G15b. Although he's
armed with a rapier, Orond throws himsell at the mercy
of the first person to bust through his barricade.

Characters who have Lord Gralhund at their mercy
can pry the following information from him with a



@@@ 16 @@@



successful DC 10 Charisma (Intimidation) check, but
the check is made with disadvantage if Lord Gralhund
has reason to believe his wife can see aor overhear the
conversation:

« “The Stone of Golorr is some kind of ancient creature
transformed into an artifact. It knows the location
of a hidden vault in Waterdeep containing half a mil-
lion dragons.”

» “House Gralhund has been bankrolling Black Net-
work operations in Waterdeep, including the plot
to kidnap Renaer Neverember and the plot to steal
the Stone of Golorr from his father's gnome spy,
Dalakhar.”

+ “My wife was frustrated with the Zhents and their
inability to secure the artifact. She gave a necklace of
fireballs to her mechanical servant and sent it out to
help retrieve the stone. It was careless and caught the
Zhents in the fireball by mistake.”

G16. MASTER BEDROOM
The doors to this room have been thrown open. The
room contains the following occupants and features:

+ Yalah Gralhund, wearing a breastplate and armed
with a rapier, stands next to her well-dressed half-
orc bodyguard, Hrabbaz (see appendix B for their
statistics),

« Alocked wooden trunk rests at the foot of a large, can-
opied bed in the southwest corner.

» A claw-footed bathtub sits in the northwest alcove
near a freestanding mirror and a privacy screen.

« Hanging above a fireplace in the southeast corner is a
shield that bears the Gralhund coat of arms. Logs are
stacked neatly next to the hearth.

« A tall mahogany wardrobe stuffed with expensive
gowns and dress clothes stands next to a pair of open
glass doors leading out to a balcony.

Yalah Gralhund. Lady Gralhund gave the Stone of
Golorr and a map of where to take it to her nimblewright
servant, who has left the villa by the time the characters
reach this chamber. Its escape is crucial, since it sets
into motion the events in chapter 4.

Lady Gralhund and Hrabbaz are the only people who
know where the nimblewright has gone, but they feign
ignorance when questioned about it.

Yalah carries a ring of keys that open all locked doors
in the mansion, as well as the locked wooden trunk at
the foot of the bed. If her situation turns dire and Hrab-
baz is unable to protect her, Yalah unlocks the door to
area G18, rushes inside, and locks the door behind her
with her next action. She makes her hinal stand there,
with her children cowering behind her.

Wooden Trunk. The lock on the trunk can be picked
with thieves' tools and a successful DC 15 Dexterity
check. The trunk appears to contain folded clothes
and shoes. A secret compartment in the bottom can be
detected by someone who examines the outside of the
trunk and makes a successful DC 15 Wisdom (Percep-
tion) check. The compartment holds two holy symbols
of Asmodeus and two robes, each red and gold in color.

Lord and Lady Gralhund are both secret members of a
cult of Asmodeus worshipers popular among select no-
bles in Waterdeep. The cult is led by Lord Victoro Cas-

salanter (see appendix B), though the Gralhunds won't

divulge this information willingly.

Gl17. BALCONY

This large balcony is enclosed by an ornate wrought-
iron railing and has lounge chairs neatly arranged on it.
The ground is 20 feet below, and open glass doors lead
to the master bedroom (area G16).

G18. CHILDREN'S ROOM

The door to this room is locked. The lock can be
picked with a successful DC 15 Dexterity check using
thieves' tools.

Three beds line the south wall, and an empty cradle
rests against the east wall. Other furnishings include
squat wardrobes, play rugs, and children’s desks.

Children. Confined here for their safety are the Gral-
hunds’ two youngest children, a 13-year-old boy named
Zartan and a 10-year-old bov named Greth. Both are
noncombatants. Their 18-year-old sister, Tomassin, is
visiting a tiefling cousin in Yartar.

G19. SERVANTS' WING

Three rooms in the southeast area of the upper floor are
where the servants sleep at night. The head butler and
head maid have rooms to themselves, but those places
are currently unoccupied. The largest of the three cham-
bers is a common room containing six bunk beds for
the junior staff. A total of nine maids, cooks, and valets
(commoners) are holed up here, waiting for someone

to rescue them., They are armed with improvised weap-
ons (rolling pins, mops, brooms, and the like) that are
treated as clubs.

AFTERMATH

After fleeing Gralhund Villa with the Stone of Golorr,
Lady Gralhund’s nimblewright hides the artifact in

a secret location in Waterdeep, setting the stage for
chapter 4.

Even if the bloody conflict at Gralhund Villa goes
unnoticed outside the walls of the estate, the carnage
can't be hidden from the City Watch for long. There are
too many murdered servants and guards for anyone
to conceal what has transpired. The arrival of the City
Watch foreshadows the return of Barnibus Blastwind
and Saeth Cromley (see appendix B), who arrive in due
course with twenty constables (veterans) and two Grif-
fon Cavalry riders (sece appendix B) astride griffons. 2
The griffons and their riders remain airborne, providing A
aerial support and reconnaissance. 7

Barnibus thoroughly investigates the Gralhund Villa
crime scene and questions neighbors and bystanders. \-.
Characters who are seen leaving the scene become sus-
pects, If the characters killed any members of the Gral-
hund family and left witnesses or evidence of the act,
Barnibus instructs Sergeant Cromley to arrest them for
the crime of murdering a noble, which carries a death
sentence if they're found guilty.

CHAPTER 3 | FIREBALLA



@@@ 17 @@@



[.LOOSE ENDS

You can use the following optional event to address
what happens to the Zhentarim in the aftermath.

BAD TIME TO BE A ZHENT

Within days after the events that local broadsheets

dub the “Gralhund Villa Bloodbath,” the City Watch
cracks down on the Black Network. Even members of
the Zhentarim who have no known criminal ties are
rounded up and interrogated, including Davil Starsong
(see appendix B). Characters who are members of the
faction are safe for the time being, as long as they keep

a low profile. Otherwise, they too are rounded up and
questioned over a period of several days, until the Lords
of Waterdeep ascertain their level of involvement in the
violence at Gralhund Villa. The broadsheets jump on the
bandwagon by portraying the Black Network in the most
unflattering light, thus dealing a crippling blow to the
faction’s already questionable reputation,

ENCOUNTER WITH ISTRID HORN

This encounter occurs only if the characters were di-
rectly involved in the events that transpired at Gralhund
Villa. After Davil Starsong is taken in for questioning,
Istrid Horn (see appendix B) sends a message to the
characters by way of a flying snake. The message, writ-
ten in Common, reads as follows:

[ ] L ]
| would like to know more about what happened at Gral-
hund Villa. If you can spare the time, meet me at Ahghai-
ron's Statue in the City of the Dead at highsun tomorrow.
You'll be paid generously for your time and trouble.
—Istrid Horn

If the characters attend the meeting, use the following
boxed text to help set the scene, embellishing it to reflect
the season:

B .
Ahghairon’s Statue is a well-known landmark in the city's
parkland cemetery: a tall, marble sculpture of a bearded,
robed wizard standing atop concentric steps and facing
west toward the skyline of Waterdeep, his hands out-
stretched and a broad smile on his face. At the foot of the
statue stands a female dwarf clad in plate armor.

If the weather is fair, characters can see pedestrians,
picnickers, and frolicking children throughout the cem-

etery grounds. It's clear that Istrid chose a safe, public
place for the meeting. Characters who succeed on a DC
15 Wisdom (Insight) check can tell that she came alone.

Istrid fears being arrested by the City Watch. Although
she wasn't involved in the matters concerning Gralhund
Villa, she is worried that the Watch will uncover her
illegal currency-lending operation in the course of its
investigations. She offers the characters 10 pp just for
meeting with her and promises another 40 pp if the
characters agree to help her lie low for a tenday—half to
be paid once a deal is struck and half at the end of her
stay. If they decline her offer and the party includes one
or more Zhentarim members, she threatens that if she’s
arrested and charged with a crime, she will reveal their
affiliation and bring them down with her.

Hiding Istrid. If the characters decide to let Istrid
hide out at their tavern, she uses a disguise kit to make
herself up to be a male dwarf named Jorn. If asked to
do so, she's willing to perform chores around the place
once she settles in. Ultimately, no one comes looking for
her, but the longer she stays hidden, the more testy and
demanding she becomes.

If the characters tolerate her bad behavior, Istrid
leaves at the end of the tenday as promised and pays
characters the remainder of what she owes. Characters
who are members of the Zhentarim gain an added bene-
fit for harboring Istrid in her time of need: their renown
in the faction increases by 2.

If, on the other hand, the characters throw her out or
rat her out to the City Watch, Istrid becomes their mor-
tal enemy and tries to undermine them at every turn.

Harming Istrid. As a precaution against being dou-
ble-crossed, Istrid shared her plan concerning the
characters with at least one other member of the Doom
Raiders (see appendix B). If the characters betray or
harm Istrid, her former adventuring companions use
every resource at their disposal to ruin the characters.
The laws of Waterdeep discourage them from attacking
the characters openly, but they can damage the party’s
business by scaring off their clientele, and characters
might find themselves the targets of worse if they dare
to leave the confines of the city.

LEVEL ADVANCEMENT

If you're leveling up characters using story milestones
instead of tracking experience points, the characters ad-
vance from 3rd to 4th level if they conducted their own
investigation into the fireball incident and affected the
outcome of events in Gralhund Villa. Otherwise, they
are still 3rd level at the start of chapter 4.



@@@ 18 @@@



F

CHAPTER 4: DRAGON SEASON ))& .

OLD MAKES PEOPLE DO STRANGE THINGS, AND - If Manshoon is the villain, the stone is brought to
Lord Neverember's hidden cache of dragons Thrakkus, a dragonborn butcher in the Field Ward
is up for grabs. The Stone of Golorr knows who chops up bodies for the Zhentarim.
where the treasure vault is located and how to
get inside, and much of this chapter focuses on FINDING THE NIMBLEWRIGHT
the characters’ hunt for the artifact. The chal- If the characters can't pick up the trail after the nimble-
lenges before them depend on the villain (or wright escapes with the Stone of Golorr, they might turn
villains) that you selected to oppose them. Whatever the to the City Watch. the City Guard, or a ﬁ"iEﬂ{i'lj.’ faction
season, a villain's goals are simple: obtain the stone, find for help, which comes forth in 1d4 days. If it occurs to
the Vault of Dragons, and claim the treasure within, none of the characters. an NPC suggésts that the party
visit the House of Inspired Hands to see whether the
SETTI NG THE STAGE priests of Gond know a way to find it (see "Nim's Se-
In chapter 3, Lady Gralhund’s nimblewright took the cret,” page 46). Thereafter, armed with Nim's nimble-
Stone of Golorr and fled with it. The nimblewright de- wright detector, the characters can sweep the city. But
livers the artifact to a location and leaves it there for the by the time they find the nimblewright, it has already
main villain or villains to retrieve: delivered the Stone of Golorr to its intended destination.
« If Xanathar is the villain, the stone is delivered to a CAUGHT AT LAST!
mage named Grinda Garloth. She owns an apparatus When it is finally found, the nimblewright (see appen-
of Kwalish and lives in Mistshore, a seedy neighbor- dix B) is wearing a stolen cloak and hiding under a
hood built on a dock in the Dock Ward. pile of uncollected garbage in an alley. Exactly where
+ If the Cassalanters are the villains, the stone is left in and when the characters stumble upon it is up to you. wﬂ'
their family crypt in Waterdeep's cemetery, the City of With nowhere to go and no other purpose, it fights until w0y
the Dead. A halfling necromancer gets to it before the destroyed. Regardless of where and when this event f ﬁ
Cassalanters or the characters do. takes place, six members of the City Watch (veterans) ~—
+ If Jarlaxle is the villain, the stone is delivered to arrive as the fight ends. Drawn by the commotion, the ~
Fenerus Stormcastle, a lamplighter in the Trades Watch couldn't care less about the nimblewright and
Ward. Fenerus has a criminal history and is currently believes any plausible story the characters tell them. (As
in trouble with the law. a construct, it had no rights to speak of,) The officers

CHAPIER 4 DRAGON SEASON



@@@ 19 @@@



are near the end of their shift and eager to move on;
they urge the characters to go home and cause no fur-
ther mischied.

[LADY GRALHUND'S MAP

Lady Gralhund gave her nimblewright a map showing
where to take the Stone of Golorr, but she forgot to

tell it to destroy the map once the stone was delivered.
Characters who search the nimblewright's remains find
the folded-up map, which depicts one of Waterdeep's
wards, Writien on the map is an X with a name next to
it. This map points the characters to where they need to
be, setting off a sequence of encounters (see “Encoun-
ter Chains” below). The main villain determines which
ward the map depicts and what name is written on it:

« If Xanathar is the villain, “Grinda Garloth” is written
by the X on a map of the Dock Ward. (The X marks the
dock neighborhood of Mistshore, where Grinda lives.)

» If the Cassalanters are the villains, the name "Cas-
salanter” is written by the X on a map of the City of the
Dead. (The X marks the location of the Cassalanter
mausoleum.)

« If Jarlaxle is the villain, “Fenerus Stormcastle” is writ-
ten by the X on a map of the Trades Ward. (Residents
of the Trades Ward know Fenerus. He's a lamplighter
with an alley dwelling. The X marks the alley.)

- — .

OBTAINING THE STONE OF GOLORR

The Stone of Golorr possesses an intelligent, alien intellect
and has enough prescience to realize that the characters
are destined to find it. The stone doesn’t want to be found
too easily, though.

If the characters obtain the stone earlier than expected, it
proves uncooperative and tries to separate itself from the
party as quickly as possible, refusing to share any knowl-
edge with characters in the meantime. The stone tries to
take control of anyone whe attunes to it, triggering a con-
flict (see “Sentient Magic Items” in chapter 7 of the Dun-
geon Master’s Guide). If the stone fails to take control, it
can't try again against that character until the next dawn, If
the stone succeeds in taking control of its owner, it orders
that character to deliver it to whichever location sets into
motion the sequence of encounters discussed in this chap-
ter (see “Encounter Chains”). Once the stone divests itself
of its current owner, it tries to erase all knowledge of itself
from that character's mind (see the item’s description in
appendix A). Any player whose character is forced to for-
get about the stone carries the burden of roleplaying that
memory loss. You can award inspiration to that character
as a way to acknowledge the player’s good roleplaying.

As chapter 4 unfolds, you decide when it's time for the
characters to have a chance of securing the Stone of Golorr.
Try to keep it out of their hands for as long as possible to
maximize the suspense.

Once the characters have earned the Stone of Golorr, it
no longer tries to take control of them. A character can
attune to it and learn the following information:

+ The location of the Vault of Dragons (see “Vault of Drag-
ons,” page 94)

+ The three keys required to unlock the vault’s doors (see
“Vault Keys,” page 90)

+ The name of the vault's gold dragon guardian, and the

 pawers of the staff in its passession (see the description

! of the dragonstaff of Ahghairon in appendix A)

CHAPTER 4 | DRAGON SEASON

- If Manshoon is the villain, “Thrakkus” is written by
the X on a map of the Field Ward. (The X marks the
location of Thrakkus's butcher shop and residence.)

ENCOUNTER CHAINS

Eight encounters comprise the characters’ hunt for the
Stone of Golorr and the Vault of Dragons. They form a
chain, and their order is determined by your choice of
villain and season. The diagram on the facing page illus-
trates the order of encounters in each chain, If Xanathar
is the villain, for example, the chain begins with encoun-
ter 2, “Mistshore,” and ends with encounter 6, “Theater.”

Don't feel bound by an encounter chain. Let the char-
acters' decisions and actions drive the story. You can
change the order in which encounters happen, remove
encounters you don't need, or create new encounters.
You can also modify encounters to suit your tastes.

If the characters stray, they might find themselves at a
loss for what to do next. You have a couple of easy ways
to guide them back on track:

+ A friendly faction that has information about the
whereabouts of the Stone of Golorr whereabouts can
bring that knowledge fo the characters.

« A treacherous underling of the villain reveals the loca-
tion of the Stone of Golorr for a price.

SPRING ENCOUNTER CHAIN

Ah, springtime—when beholder eyestalks are in bloom.

The Stone of Golorr was originally snatched from Xana-
thar, and the eye tyrant wants it back. It sends monsters
and minions to do its dirty work.

SUMMARY

The stone is delivered to Grinda Garloth, a mage who
has worked for Xanathar in the past, When she refuses
to give up the stone, members of the Xanathar Guild
try to take it by force (encounter 2, “Mistshore”). After
the characters defeat these attackers, they learn that
Grinda told her rat familiar to hide the stone in her fam-
ily’s crypt in the City of the Dead. From this point on,
the characters are followed by a gazer (see appendix B),
through whose eves Xanathar can see, If this gazer is
killed, Xanathar doesn't send another one to replace it.
Losser Mirklav, a halfling necromancer, raids the Gar-
loth mausoleum and takes the stone shortly before the
characters arrive (encounter 4, “Mausoleum”). As they
emerge from the mausoleum, members of the Xanathar
Guild attack them, believing they have the stone. A clue
left behind in the mausoleum leads the characters to
an old windmill in the Southern Ward and a pair of
grave robbers (encounter 10, “Converted Windmill™).
Fearing arrest, the grave robbers point them to a cellar
complex under the Trades Ward (encounter 9, “Cellar
Complex”™). When the characters arrive, they find Losser
surrounded by foes and kenku working for the Xana-
thar Guild making off with the stone. A chase through
the streets on or before Trolltide (encounter 3, “Street
Chase") ends when the kenku, fearing capture, duck
into an old tower (encounter 7, "Old Tower”). If they are
caught and confronted, the kenku hand over the stone.



@@@ 20 @@@


@@@ 1 @@@



The Xanathar Guild makes one last attempt to regain
the stone (encounter 1, “Alley”). Any character who be-
comes attuned to the stone learns that the Vault of Drag-

ons lies beneath a theater in the Castle Ward (encounter
0, “Theater™).

WEATHER EFFECTS

Until the encounter chain is complete, the following
weather effects are in play.

Heavy Rain. Heavy rain falls from noon until mid-
night. Creatures in the rain have disadvantage on Wis-
dom (Perception) checks that rely on hearing or sight.
The rain also extinguishes open flames. Visibility is
reduced to 60 feet.

Thick Fog. From midnight until noon, the city is en-
gulfed in thick fog. Creatures in the fog have disadvan-
tage on Wisdom (Perception) checks that rely on sight.
Visibility is reduced to 30 feet.

SUMMER ENCOUNTER CHAIN

As Waterdavians contend with sweltering heat, the Cas-
salanters send disciples of their Asmodeus-worshiping
cult to seize the Stone of Golorr while deftly avoiding
entanglements with local authorities.

SUMMARY

The characters arrive at the Cassalanter mausoleum to
find several dead cultists inside (encounter 4, “Mauso-
leum”). A left-for-dead survivor reveals that these cult-
ists were betrayed by two of their own. The characters
head to an old windmill in the Southern Ward where the
cult fanatics practice their diabolical faith (encounter 10,
“Converted Windmill™). Spined devils swoop in, snatch
the stone, and flee, setting up a rooftop chase (encounter
5, "Rooftop Chase").

The spined devils deliver the stone to a hire-coach
parked in an alley (encounter 1, “Alley”). Inside the
coach is Victoro Cassalanter’s valet, Willifort Crowelle,
a doppelganger in tiefling form. As the hire-coach flees,
a street chase ensues (encounter 3, “Street Chase”).
When a crowd cuts off his escape route, Willifort leaps
out of the hire-coach and tries to lose himself in the
crowd. In the confusion, street urchins snatch the stone.
The characters catch up to the children in their cellar
hideout (encounter 9, “Cellar Complex”).

With the Stone of Golorr in their possession, the
characters emerge from the cellar complex only to find
themselves surrounded by members of the City Watch.
They are arrested for one or more crimes and taken to
a courthouse in the Dock Ward to face sentencing by a

i e | .
IF AVILLAIN GETS THE STONE

If a main villain acquires the Stone of Golorr, it takes that
villain 2d6 days to find the Vault of Dragons and its keys.
During this time, the characters have a chance to steal the
stone from the villain’s lair. If the characters don't steal the
stone in time, the villain sends forces into the vault to de-
feat Aurinax and recover the gold, which takes another 2d6
days. Once the gold is recovered, the villain moves forward
with a master plan as detailed in the introduction. If the

I characters are still alive, they could oppose the villain by

- 4 stealing the gold from the villain's lair.

ICHAPTER 4 | DRAGON SEASON

magister (encounter 8, “Courthouse™). Meanwhile, the
doppelganger tries to get the stone back.

Any character who becomes attuned to the Stone
of Golorr learns that the Vault of Dragons is hidden
under an old tower in the Sea Ward (encounter 7, “Old
Tower"). When they arrive at the tower, they encounter
its new owner, who is discussing renovations with vari-
ous local guild members.

WEATHER EFFECTS
Until the encounter chain is complete, the following
weather effect is in play.

Heat Wave, During the day, a character without
access to drinkable water must succeed on a DC 10
Constitution saving throw at the end of each encounter
in the chain or gain one level of exhaustion. The saving
throw is made with disadvantage if the character is
wearing medium or heavy armor, Characters who have
resistance or immunity to fire automatically succeed on
the saving throw.

AUTUMN ENCOUNTER CHAIN

Deception and misdirection are Jarlaxle's forte, and he
likes to trick his rivals into working for him. He steers
the characters toward the Srone of Golorr and lets them
think they're always one step ahead. Drow player char-
acters who are members of Bregan D’aerthe might find
their loyalty to the party put to the test.

SUMMARY

The characters visit the residence of Fenerus Storm-
castle, a lamplighter and retired brigand who funnels
information to Bregan D’aerthe, They arrive to find the
place ransacked (encounter 1, “Alley”). The duergar
who looted the residence work for the Xanathar Guild,
and Bregan D'aerthe spies have tracked them to a
cellar complex in the Southern Ward. In the guise of
Laeral Silverhand, Jarlaxle steers the characters in that
direction (encounter 9, “Cellar Complex”). A search of
the cellar complex yields a fake stone, but not the real
Stone of Golorr. With no other leads, the characters can
follow up with “Laeral” at a theater in the Dock Ward
(encounter 6, “Theater”). Jarlaxle makes the characters
an offer they can’t refuse, setting his agents on them if
they dare to do so.

Once he realizes the Xanathar Guild doesn't have
the stone, Jarlaxle asks the characters to interrogate
Fenerus to find out where he hid it. Jarlaxle has learned
that Fenerus is awaiting trial at a courthouse in the Cas-
tle Ward (encounter 8, “Courthouse”). Fenerus wants
immunity for all of his past crimes, The characters are
in no position to grant his wish, but they might threaten
him, persuade him, or use magic to charm him. If he is
compelled to reveal the stone’s location, Fenerus points
the characters to an old tower in the Dock Ward (en-
counter 7, “Old Tower™).

Jarlaxie's lieutenants reach the stone first and flee
across the rooftops in the Dock Ward to escape the
characters (encounter 5, “Rooftop Chase”). They go to
ground in Mistshore (encounter 2, “Mistshore”). Once
the characters wrest the stone away from these drow,
they can use it to guide them to the home of a famous



@@@ 2 @@@



painter in the Sea Ward (encounter 10, “Converted
Windmill"), beneath which is a tunnel that leads to the
Vault of Dragons.

WEATHER EFFECTS
Until the encounter chain is complete, the following
weather effect is in play.

Autumn Wind. Wind whistling through the streets
imposes disadvantage on ranged weapon attack rolls
and Wisdom (Perception) checks that rely on hearing.
The wind also extinguishes open fires smaller than a
torch flame.

ININTER ENCOUN_TER GHﬁIN

Now is the winter of Waterdeep's discontent. The
Zhents who serve Manshoon believe their master to be
all-powerful, which has made them reckless. Against a
frigid backdrop, they're willing to thumb their noses at
local authorities and risk death in pursuit of the Stone

of Golorr.

SUMMARY

The stone is delivered to Thrakkus, a dragonborn
butcher in the Field Ward (encounter 10, “Converted
Windmill”). Thrakkus hides the stone in one of his meat
deliveries. The characters follow the delivery cart to an
alley in the Trades Ward where Zhents meet in secret
(encounter 1, “Alley™). Before the characters can lay
hands on the stane, a Zhent named Vevette Blackwater
grabs it and flees, initiating a chase across icy rooftops
(encounter 5, “Rooftop Chase”). She hands off the stone
to Agorn Fuoco, a bard who is attending a play in a
nearby theater (encounter 6, “Theater™), before leading
her pursuers on a merry chase through the snow-cov-
ered streets (encounter 3, “Street Chase”). The charac-
ters learn that the stone has been taken by hire-coach to
Mistshore. The characters can catch up to Agorn there
(encounter 2, “Mistshore”).

[f he is captured and questioned, Agorn reveals that
he made one stop on his way to Mistshore. He dropped
off a lady friend, a priest of Bane allied with the Zhen-
tarim, and left the stone with her and her acaolytes for
safekeeping. The characters can find them in an old
tower in the Castle Ward (encounter 7, “Old Tower™), Be-
fore they leave that place, the characters are confronted
by Manshoon's simulacrum, which arrives by way of
teleportation circle to collect the stone. Once the simu-
lacrum is defeated, the characters can use the stone to
learn that the entrance to the Vault of Dragons is hidden
below a mausoleum in the City of the Dead (encounter 4,
“Mausoleum”).

WEATHER EFFECTS
Until the encounter chain is complete, the following
weather effects are in play.

Blizzard. Shrieking wind and falling snow impose
disadvantage on Wisdom (Perception) checks that rely
on hearing or sight. The wind also extinguishes open
fires smaller than a torch lame. Visibility is reduced to
60 feet. Snow on the ground creates difficult terrain in
areas that are not heavily trod.

Extreme Cold. A character exposed to the cold must
succeed on a DC 10 Constitution saving throw at the
end of each encounter in the chain or gain one level of
exhaustion, Characters who have resistance or immu-
nity to cold automatically succeed on the saving throw,
as do those wearing cold weather gear (thick coats,
gloves, hats, and the like).

ENCOUNTER l: ALLEY

Use map 4.1 for this encounter. The buildings that bor-
der the alley are 30 feet (three stories) high unless you
decide otherwise. Since this encounter occurs outdoors,
be mindful of any weather effects in play.

AREAS OF THE ALLEY

The following locations are keyed to map 4.1.

Ll. ALLEY RESIDENCE
This old, one-story, windowless stone house with a slate
roof is tucked in the middle of the alley, surrounded by
taller buildings. Its doors are made of sturdy wood, and
the outer door can be barred shut from within. Break-
ing down the barred door requires a successful DC 18
Strength (Athletics) check.

The interior is divided into two rooms, a kitchen with
a fireplace and a plainly furnished bedroom,

2. STORE

This stone building is a store of one kind or another. If
an encounter doesn't specify the goods sold here, roll
a d20 and consult the Store Goods table to determine
what the store sells.

A small room serves as a cloakroom, where visitors
can hang their heavier overgarments, Past the cloak-
room js the store proper, with wares on display. The
room to the north is a storeroom or a workshop. The
store owner (commoner) has keys to all doors.

Store GoobDs

d20 Goods d20 Coods
1 Art n Hats
2 Books 12 Hunting traps
3 Candles 13 Locks and keys
4 Cartwheels 14 Musical instruments
5  Costumes 15  Pets
6 Dolls 16 Pots
7 Fresh meat 17  Rations
& Furniture 18 Rugs
9  Games 19  Umbrellas
10 Class 20 Wine
il [ .

MODIFYINGC ENCOUNTERS

You can adjust the difficulty of a combat encounter by add-
ing or subtracting monsters. If you need to increase the
difficulty of an encounter that has already begun, have en-
emy reinforcements arrive during the battle. If you find an
encounter too deadly, reduce the antagonists’ hit points,
have NPCs arrive to help the characters, or have the bad
guys cut their losses and flee.

CHAPTER 4 | DRAGON SEASON



@@@ 3 @@@



|
— “Alley — o
| _entrance

=

Mar 4.1: ALLEY

it eI i sk e s - -

ALLEY: SPRING

) . \
. 1_ 1l
.
y N B
o 5 |
f/““ """"""""x“ﬂ-"*-'§ | Alley — -
45 . ~ entrance._ ..
N j B
\ ; L
7 3 | &/
f Y | =
"" “ | | | |[ : “‘,.
ﬁm-“ ..?w“u —- ik ; )g :
\. =¥ /
I T | , 1 )@

When this encounter begins, either the characters have
the Stone of Golorr in their clutches, in which case
they're jumped as they move through an alley near the
tower—or it was taken from them by Xanathar's gazer
spies, in which case they catch up with the gazers in the
alley before the creatures can descend into the sewers.

BEAR TRAPS

Choose five squares on the map. These squares con-
tain deep puddles of muddy water, Hidden within each
puddle is a spring-loaded bear trap. A creature that has
a passive Perception score of 13 or higher spots a trap
before accidentally stepping in it.

Any creature that steps into a trap's square must
make a DC 10 Dexterity saving throw. On a failed
save, the creature takes 3 (1d6) slashing damage as
the trap snaps shut around its ankle, and the creature
is restrained until the trap is removed. As an action, a
creature can try to pry open the trap, doing so with a
successful DC 12 Strength (Athletics) check.

.~ AMBUSHERS

The characters enter the alley followed by eight kobolds
disguised as children wearing troll masks. A bugbear
named Morga and an intellect devourer hide in a door-
way halfway down the alley and can be spotted with a
successful DC 16 Wisdom (Perception) check.

| When the characters reach Morga's hiding spot, the

~ bugbear and the kobolds attack. The intellect devourer

s
_.:.-".—1'-.-:—

stays hidden and tries to take control of a character.
Given the chance, Morga tries to shove a character into
the nearest trap. If these creatures obtain the stone, they
bring it to Xanathar in its lair (see chapter 5).

NEXT ENCOUNTER

If a character becomes attuned to the Srone of Golorr,
it reveals the location of the Vault of Dragons, below

a theater in the Castle Ward called the Pink Flumph,
and the three keys that are needed to enter it. When the
characters are ready to visit the location, proceed with
encounter 6, “Theater.”

ALLEY: SUMMER

The characters begin this encounter on the rooftops
overlooking the alley. If any characters went to ground
during the rooftop chase, start them at one end of the
alley instead.

HIrRe-COACH

Parked in the middle of the alley is a hire-coach pulled
by two draft horses. The driver, Haru Hamatori (LG
male Kozakuran human commoner), wears a feathered
cap and matching outfit.

Lord Cassalanter's doppelganger valet, in the guise of
an elderly tiefling named Willifort Crowelle, sits in the
passenger cab, which grants half cover. Standing next to
the hire-coach is a bearded devil disguised as a cloaked
human bodyguard wearing a wide-brimmed hat, and
perched on the coach are three invisible imps. Any



@@@ 4 @@@



spined devils that survived the previous encounter are
also present, having just delivered the Stone of Golorr to
Willifort.

When he sees the characters, Willifort orders the
imps and the spined devils to attack. The bearded devil
stays close to Willifort and engages any character who
tries to reach the hire-coach.

The hire-coach has AC 14, 45 hit points, and immunity
to poison and psychic damage.

If there's any chance that the characters might obtain
the Stone of Golorr as the encounter progresses, Willi-
fort orders the driver to move the hire-coach out of the
alley as quickly as possible. If the driver is incapacitated
or killed, the bearded devil climbs into the driver’s seat
on the back of the coach and steers the vehicle. If the
bearded devil is unable to replace the driver, the doppel-
ganger takes the reins. Willifort flees on foot if the hire-
coach is destroyed or its horses are unable to move.

NEXT ENCOUNTER

If Willifort escapes and the characters pursue him, pro-
ceed with encounter 3, “Street Chase,”

ALLEY: AUTUMN

The characters’ quest for the Stone of Golorr first leads
them to Fenerus Stormeastle, a lamplighter who rents a
small house in the Trades Ward (area L1).

APPLE CART
The characters enter the alley from either end. Deter-

mine their marching order, then read the following text
once they reach the alley's midpoint:

[ ] ¥
A cart laden with apples comes careening toward you
from the opposite direction, roliing downhill. Riding on
the cart is a tiefling boy with an eye patch, screaming at

the top of his lungs. “Look out!” he shouts.
. L]

A character in the path of the apple cart must succeed
on a DC 10 Dexterity saving throw or be struck for 5
(2d4) bludgeoning damage and knocked prone. A char-
acter can forgo the Dexterity saving throw and try to
stop the cart bodily, doing so with a successful DC 15
Strength saving throw. On a failed save, the character is
struck bv the cart and falls prone as it continues to roll.
After plowing through the party, the cart lips on its side,
sending apples tumbling down the alley. The tiefling boy
is thrown from the cart but not seriously hurt.

The boy is one of three street urchins who teamed up
to steal the apple cart from a nearby street corner. The
other two children lost control of the cart at the crest
of the alley before they could hop on. They catch up to
their friend after the crash, make sure he’s all right, and
then apologize profusely to anyone who was hurt, The
urchins, harmless troublemakers, are detailed in the
sidebar “The Three Urchins.”

If they are asked about Fenerus, the children know
who he is. They describe him as a big man with graying
hair who looks like he has been in many fights, based

on “the scars he wears on his face.” They know nothing
more about him, other than that he lives alone.

If the characters don't frighten them away, the chil-
dren loiter around the alley, eating apples and picking
through garbage piles.

FENERUS'S HOUSE

The door to Fenerus's house stands open, and the place
has been ransacked. Painted in blood on the kitchen
wall is a circle with ten equidistant lines radiating out-
ward from its circumference: the sign of Xanathar. A
thorough search accompanied by a successful DC 12
Wisdom (Perception) check reveals small pools of blood
on the kitchen floor. A successful check also verifies that
the blood on the floor and wall is fresh.

FENERUS'S STORY

Fenerus Stormcastle was the founder of the Blood
Hawk Posse, a gang of horse-riding brigands that, to
this day, harries travelers on the road to Amphail. When
he was drummed out of the gang after a botched raid,
Fenerus “retired” to Waterdeep and joined the Guild of
Chandlers and Lamplighters.

Until recently, Fenerus supplemented his income by
spying for the city of Luskan and providing his contacts
with information on the political climate in Waterdeep,
as well as juicy bits of news overheard on his nightly
rounds through the Trades Ward, He has no clue that
his contacts are drow members of Bregan D'aerthe,
since they wear cloaks and keep to the shadows.

Agents of the Lords’ Alliance recently labeled Fenerus
as a wanted brigand and notified the Lords of Water-
deep, who sent the City Watch to arrest him, Fenerus
had the good sense to hide the Stone of Golorr else-
where and hopes to use it as leverage to gain his free-
dom as well as forgiveness for past crimes.

Shortly after Fenerus's arrest, drow agents of Bregan
D’aerthe showed up to collect the stone and were way-
laid by invisible duergar hiding in the alley. The duergar
were members of the Xanathar Guild that had been sent
by Nar'l Xibrindas (see appendix B) to retrieve the stone.
After searching Fenerus's home and finding nothing,
they were waiting for Fenerus to return when the drow
showed up. The drow barely got away with their lives.

JARLAXLE IN DISGUISE

Before the characters leave the alley, Jarlaxle Baenre

(see appendix B) uses his hat of disguise to approach

PO LR S
THE THREE URCHINS

Three street urchins, described below, appear in several of
this chaptet’s scenes:

Nat is a lanky, 10-year-old deaf llluskan girl with a wooden
toy sword. She is the leader of the group and communi-
cates using a sign language that she invented and taught
to her friends.

Jenks is a portly 9-year-old Turami boy with a cloak, a toy
wand, and a stuffed owlbear “familiar.” He’s shy around
strangers but brave when it comes to helping his friends.

Squiddly is a slim 9-year-old tiefling boy with an eye patch,
a small bow, and a quiver of toy arrows. He rarely thinks
before he talks or acts.



@@@ 5 @@@



them in the guise of Laeral Silverhand, the Open Lord
of Waterdeep:

A tall, graceful woman in an emerald green cloak ap-
proaches you, her long, silver hair billowing out from
under her hood. “If you've come looking for Fenerus
Stormcastle, I'm afraid you're too late,” she says. “It
appears Xanathar has gotten to him first. Fenerus had
something in his possession that | desire. Perhaps you
can help retrieve it."

[ ] »

“"Laeral” tells the characters that Fenerus had a sen-
tient magic item in his possession called the Stone of
Golorr, which knows the location of a large cache of
gold that was embezzled from the city by its previous
Open Lord. She asks the characters to retrieve the
stone, for the good of Waterdeep, and deliver it to her at
the Seven Masks Theater in the Dock Ward. “Laeral”
offers no reward other than the gratitude of Waterdeep's
Open Lord.

Jarlaxle suspects that Nar'l Xibrindas, his spy in the
Xanathar Guild, has betrayed him and is now using
the resources of Bregan D'aerthe to help the beholder
retrieve the stone. Jarlaxle also knows that the Xanathar
Guild has a refuge fairly close by, in a cellar complex un-
der the Southern Ward. “Laeral” suggests that the char-
acters search for the stone there. (Jarlaxle doesn't want
Nar'l to know that he's onto him, which is why he would
rather send a small group of adventurers than call upon
a Bregan D'aerthe attack force.)

Characters who are suspicious of Laeral's intentions
can ascertain that she's hiding something with a suc-
cessful Wisdom (Insight) check contested by Jarlaxle’s
Charisma (Deception) check. If the characters somehow
penetrate Jarlaxle's disguise, he smiles and offers them
10,000 gp if they promptly deliver the stone to him at the
Seven Masks Theater. He assures them, in all honesty,
that he plans to give the gold back to Waterdeep in ex-
change for some political goodwill.

NEXT ENCOUNTER

If the characters invade the Xanathar Guild refuge, pro-
ceed with encounter 9, “Cellar Complex.”

ALLEY: WINTER

The characters’ search for the Stone of Golorr leads
them to a snow-covered alley in the Trades Ward that
contains a windowless Zhentarim safe house (area L1)
and a meat shop called Cuttle’s Meat Pies (area L2).

The characters approach from either end of the alley.
Hoofprints and wheel ruts in the snow testify that Justyn
. .Rassk’s delivery cart passed through the alley recently
~ after a brief stop outside the meat shop. A character who
inspects the tracks and succeeds on a DC 10 Wisdom
(Survival) check can tell that the deliverer visited both
the shop and the alley residence. Before the characters
can investigate further, they are assaulted by members
of the Xanathar Guild.

o - - v i Iy

BUGBEARS ATTACK

At the end of a dead-end side alley south of areas L1 and
L2 is an iron grate that covers an opening to the sew-
ers under the North Ward. Five bugbears have quietly
climbed up through the grate and concealed themselves
in the side alley. They pour out and attack the charac-
ters, hoping to gain surprise in the blizzard. Characters
who have a passive Perception score of 16 or higher
aren t surprised.

The bugbears were sent by Xanathar to retrieve a pris-
oner being held in the Zhent safe house, but they're too
bloodthirsty to pass up the chance to murder a band of
adventurers standing in their way, The wind and snow
render the City Watch oblivious to the danger.

CUTTLE'S MEAT PIES

Characters who speak to the proprietor of the meat
shop, a portly middle-aged woman named Sora Cuttle
(LG female Illuskan human commeoner), learn that she
received an unexpected delivery from Justyn Rassk of
the Guild of Butchers. Given that fresh meat is in short
supply in winter, Sora could hardly turn it down. If the
characters see fit to tell her that the meat came from
chopped-up humanoids, Sora falls ill. She has no knowl-
edge of Thrakkus's nasty handiwork and promises to
bring the matter to the attention of the Guild of Butchers
and the local magister. Until then, she won't use any of
Thrakkus's meat to make her famous meat pies.

Sora is suspicious of her two neighbors in area L1.
They come and go at strange hours, sometimes return-
ing from a night’s sojourn with blood on their leather
armor. If the characters do Sora the courtesy of warning
her about the meat, she happily shares her concerns
about her naughty neighbors, along with descriptions
of them. One is a pale, gaunt woman in her twenties
with dark, stringy hair. The other is a much older, dark-
skinned man with a bald head, a half-missing ear, and a
short white beard.

ZHENTARIM SAFE HOUSE

This windowless house is occupied by two Zhents loyal
to Manshoon—the same individuals that Sora describes.
Their names are Avareen Windrivver (LE female Illus-
kan human spy) and Zorbog Jyarkoth (NE male Turami
human thug).

When the characters first enter the alley, Avareen is
in the front doorway of the house, handing the Stone of
Galorr to a high-ranking Zhent named Vevette Blackwa-
ter (CE female Tethyrian human swashbuckler; see ap-
pendix B). Zorbog is stoking a fire in the fireplace while
quietly observing the transaction. With stone in hand,
Vevette scrambles up to the rooftops, leaving Avareen
and Zorbog to deal with the survivors of the conflict be-
tween the characters and the bugbears.

Gagpged and tied to a chair in the back room of the
house is a known member of the Xanathar Guild—a
shield dwarf who wears a leather skullcap stitched
with fake beholder eyestalks. The dwarf, Ott Steeltoes
(see appendix B), was captured while buying fish food
in a Dock Ward market. After the Zhents interrogated
Ott, it became clear to them that Xanathar would want
him back. He is being held until a ransom is paid, but



@@@ 6 @@@



i ST

AR, )

e L oy

Map 4.2: MISTSHORE

o Al

Xanathar has learned where he is being kept. Any bug-
bears that survived the initial attack try to rescue Ott,
while Avareen and Zorbog do their best to fight them off.
If Ott is set free, he runs back to the waiting eyestalks of
his insane beholder master. Characters who follow him
are led straight to Xanathar’s lair (see chapter 5).

NEXT ENCOUNTER

Any characters within 10 feet of the Zhents' front door
can make a DC 14 Wisdom (Perception) check. Those
who succeed on the check hear a mocking laugh above
the howling wind and glimpse a cloaked figure on a
nearby roof, darting away through the blizzard, If the
characters chase after this higure, proceed with encoun-
ter 5, “Rooftop Chase.”

ENCOUNTER 2: MISTSHORE

Mistshore is a run-down Dock Ward neighborhood

that reeks of fish and scorched timber. A fire swept
through the area a little over a vear ago, and most of
the buildings are now burned-out shells with (at best)
sails for roofs. Fishing poles and nets line the dock, and
the 15-foot-deep water is covered by a thick layer of ice
during the winter.

AREAS OF MISTSHORE

Mistshore is a riotous assemblage of ramshackle homes
made of wood from old ships and inhabited by impov-
erished Waterdavians. Several buildings were reduced

1 square = 5 feet

. e i gy B

to ash by the fire last year. Although some were rebuilt,
others were ruined beyond repair and are now used as
roofless dens by homeless children and rats.

The following locations are keyed to map 4.2.

Dl. KRAKEN'S FOLLY

The Kraken's Folly is a beached pirate ship that some
residents of Mistshore use as a tenement. At any given
time, 4d6 bandits loiter on deck, hoping that someone
who needs muscle will offer them work. These ruffians
live in the rat-infested cabins belowdecks. They are will-
ing to come to the aid of anyone who asks—for a price.
Each demands 1 gp to get involved in a fight or create a
distraction on behalf of their employer.

D2. GRINDA’'S RESIDENCE

A mad treasure hunter named Grinda Garloth (CN

female Illuskan human mage who speaks Common,
Dwarvish, Halfling, and Undercommon) lives here. Her a
ramshackle home contains an unmade bed, an alche- %
mist’s laboratory, a small stove, a coat rack, a table, a i-';@
stool, a stuffed chair in poor condition, a wash basin. \ oy

and a locked wooden sea chest with a glyph of warding . '

_
spell cast on it, Grinda carries the key, and the glvph @)

triggers an explosive runes effect (see the spell descrip-
tion in the Player’s Handbook) if anyone other than
Grinda lifts the lid of the chest.

Chest. Grinda's chest contains a heavy iron key that
locks and unlocks the Garloth family mausoleum in the
City of the Dead (see “Mistshore: Spring” below).

CHAPTER 4 | DRAGON SEASON 8



@@@ 7 @@@



GrinDA GARLOTH AND HER APPARATUS OF RWALISH

D3. GRINDA'S APPARATUS

Grinda Garloth keeps her apparatus of Kwalish here
when she's not using the vehicle to hunt for treasure in
Deepwater Harbor. While the apparatus 1s here, 1t floats
in an enclosed dock. Underwater metal doors leading
out to the harbor are kept shut by an iron bar across the
inside. The apparatus can lift the iron bar automatically;
a creature inside the bay can lift it with a successful DC
20 Strength (Athletics) check.

Borrowing the Apparatus. Grinda allows the char-
acters to borrow her apparatus of Kwalish on the condi-
tion that they first use the device to search the bottom
of Deepwater Harbor for treasure and give her half of
whatever they find. To meet the mage's demands, the
characters must spend a day searching the harbor. At
the end of the day, the pilot makes an Intelligence (In-
vestigation) check. Multiply the total of the check by 10
to determine the gold piece value of any treasure found.
Grinda sells the bounty and gives half to the characters.

As the characters search the harbor for treasure, roll
any die. If an even number is rolled, an awakened shark
named Obliteros attacks them. Grinda has had several
close encounters with the shark recently, but fails to
mention this to the characters for fear of scaring them
off. Obliteros is a giant shark, with these changes:

. The shark’s alignment is chaotic evil.
. Its Intelligence score is 10 (+0), and it can speak and
understand Aquan.

-
oy

CHAPTER 4 | DRAGON SEASON

MISTSHORE: SPRING

Xanathar has sent forces to collect the Stone of Golorr
from Grinda Garloth, known up and down the wharf as
an eccentric wizard who owns a submersible contrap-
tion that she uses to hunt for treasure on the bottom of
Deepwater Harbor. The characters have no trouble get-
ting directions to her Mistshore residence (area D2).

When the characters arrive at her home, Grinda is
holed up inside, having barricaded the doors with furni-
ture. Trying to break down the doors are four members
of the Xanathar Guild (CE male human bandits) under
the command of a dwarf enforcer named Noska Ur'gray
(see appendix B). A merrow also under Noska's com:-
mand swims beneath the docks. It surfaces to attack
when the characters arrive.

If the characters come to Grinda's defense, Noska
orders his thugs to attack them while he takes potshots
at the characters with his crossbow. Two rounds later,
eight more bandits leap down from the Krakens Folly
(area D1) and join the fray. These hooligans were paid 1
gp each to watch Noska's back. The characters can turn
them against Noska by offering a larger bribe (at least
5 gp each).

If the characters turn the hooligans against Noska or
reduce the dwarf to half his hit points or fewer, Noska
flees. Any remaining Xanathar Guild members cover his
escape. Grinda emerges from her residence to thank the
characters once the fight has concluded.



@@@ 8 @@@



WHERE'S THE STONE?
Grinda admits that she has done business with the
Xanathar Guild in the past. Her orders were to pro-
tect the stone until Noska arrived to claim it, but she
changed her mind and decided to keep the stone for her-
self. She now realizes that decision was a mistake.
Grinda tells the characters that she gave the stone to
her rat familiar and told the creature to stash it in her
family’s mausoleum in the City of the Dead. The mage
gives the characters directions to the site and a key to
the mausoleum. (They won't need the key, since the
mausoleum is open when they arrive.)

SPY IN THE SKY

As the characters leave Mistshore, a gazer (see appen-
dix B) begins to follow them, staying at least 60 feet
away. Xanathar uses it to spy on the characters, Charac-
ters who have a passive Perception score of 15 or higher
can spot the gazer shortly after the party enters the City
of the Dead. The gazer defends itself if attacked.

NEXT ENCOUNTER

Armed with directions to the Garloth mausoleum, the
characters can head for the City of the Dead. The spring
chain continues with encounter 4, “Mausoleum.”

MISTSHORE: AUTUMN

At the end of their pursuit, the characters corner Fel'rekt
Lafeen and Krebbyg Masq'il'yr in Mistshore. The two
drow gunslingers (see appendix B) lurk behind the
Kraken's Folly (area D1) and wait to be rescued. When
the characters confront them, Fel'rekt and Krebhyg stall
for time until their escape vehicle arrives, If either drow
falls, the other tosses the stone into the harbor to keep it
from falling into enemy hands. A character can recover
the sunken stone by using a detect magic spell to help
pinpoint its location.

BiG BELCHY
A mechanical dragon turtle, dubbed Big Belchy, sank
in Deepwater Harbor almost a century ago. Lantanese
gnomes working for Jarlaxle have managed to repair
the construct. Two rounds after the characters corner
Fel'rekt and Krebbyg, Big Belchy surfaces next to the
dock on initiative count 5, close enough that the drow
can leap onto its barnacle-encrusted back on their
next turns.

In the round after it surfaces, the mechanism breathes
a cloud of steam onto the docks in a 30-foot cube, then
begins to move away at a swimming speed of 20 feet.
Any creature in the cloud of steam must make a DC 14
Dexterity saving throw, taking 22 (4d10) fire damage on
a failed save, or half as much damage on a successful
one. Big Belchy can breathe steam only once. On each
of its turns thereafter, it swims a total of 40 feet toward
Jarlaxle's flagship, the Eyecatcher, which is anchored in
the middle of the harbor 1 mile away.

Big Belchy has AC 18, 75 hit points, and immunity
to poison and psychic damage. If it is reduced to O hit
points, it sinks once more to the bottom of Deepwater
Harbor. If the drow are still on its back when it goes
down, they swim the rest of the way to the Eyecatcher

but gain two levels of exhaustion from the cold water
and exertion.

If the drow are defeated while on Big Belchy's back,
the Stone of Golorr tumbles off the mechanical dragon
turtle's shell and drops into Deepwater Harbor. If the
water is deep enough, the characters might need to bor-
row Grinda Garloth's apparatus of Kwalish to recover it.

NEXT ENCOUNTER

If a character becomes attuned to the Stone of Golorr, it
reveals the location of the Vault of Dragons, beneath an
old stone windmill in the Sea Ward, and the three keys
needed to enter it. When the characters are ready to visit
the location, proceed with encounter 10, “Converted

Windmill.”

MISTSHORE: WINTER

The characters head to Mistshore in search of the man
they believe has the Stone of Golorr. En route to that
destination, the man had his hire-coach make a brief
stop in the Castle Ward to drop off his lady friend. She
now has the stone—a fact that characters can discover
by questioning the man, a bard named Agorn Fuoco,

Agorn made such a good impression on Manshoon
that he was elevated quickly through the ranks of the
organization, but his life is full of disappointment oth-
erwise. He has not achieved the fame he craved nor
earned the wealth he felt he was entitled to. He has
adopted the Zhentarim credo that power comes to those
who deserve it and has come to see the Black Network
as a new family of sorts. Agorn has come to Mistshore to
visit a member of his actual family—his mother, who is
gravely ill and lives in abject poverty.

A WAITING COACH

Waiting at the edge of the neighborhood is the hire-
coach that bore Agorn Fuoco through the blizzard to
Mistshore. Two draft horses stamp their hooves impa-
tiently in the snow, The driver, Rowan Evenwood (LG
female Chondathan human commoner), was paid extra
to wait for Agorn to return. He left in a hurry, and she
doesn't know how long she is expected to wait, but her
patience has limits.

A CoLD RECEPTION

A blizzard is tearing through Mistshore, turning its
rotten tenements into dark, looming shapes behind
veils of blowing snow. The water around the docks is
frozen solid, and impoverished commoners clad in tat-
tered garments gather around sputtering campfires for _
warmth. These folk are suspicious of anyone they don't -
recognize and far from welcoming, even toward those | "i
who show them charity. These people would tear the
clothes from the characters' backs given half a chance.

ICE ESCAPADES E“
Playing on the ice underneath the docks are three street
urchins wearing frayed cloaks and gloves. They dart
in and out of view, hurling snowballs at each other and
laughing as the blizzard batters the structures above
them (see “The Three Urchins,” page 63).

CHAPTER 4 | DRAGON SEASON



@@@ 9 @@@



When the children see the characters for the first
time, their interest is piqued. The children fancy them-
selves adventurers of sorts, and they are quick to idol-
ize and emulate real-life ones. Squiddly even has the
audacity to hurl a snowball at one of them (+0 bonus to
hit). The children know who Agorn Fuoco is because he
used to live and play music in Mistshore. They offer to
lead characters to his mother’'s residence.

MOTHER AND SON
Pick one of the unmarked buildings on map 4.2 to serve
as the Fuoco residence. Agorn Fuoco (NE male Turami
bard; see appendix B) is inside, trying to smother his
bedridden mother, Marta (N female Turami human
commeoner with 1 hit point), with a sack she uses as a
pillowcase. With tears born of joy and sadness stream-
ing down his face, Agorn is cutting loose his old family
ties and embracing his new family: the Zhentarim. The
characters can stop him from committing matricide by
pulling him away from his mother before she suffocates.
Agorn was moved to perpetrate this act by the play he
saw at the theater and by his lady friend, Amath Sercent,
to whom he entrusted the Stone of Golorr. He won't give
up her location willingly, though magic can be used to
pry the information from his lips. Characters can also
speak to the hire-coach driver, Rowan Evenwood, who
dropped off Agorn’s lady friend before transporting
Agorn to Mistshore. Amath lives in an old tower in the
Castle Ward called Yellowspire.

ZHENTS IN THE WIND

As the characters leave the Fuoco residence, with or
without Agorn as their prisoner, they are surrounded
by nine Zhentarim thugs. The thugs fight to the death
while Agorn tries to escape. If he gets away, the charac-
ters might encounter him again in chapter 8.

As the Zhents attack and Agorn attempts to flee, the
characters hear a child's scream coming from the oppo-
site direction. Through the blowing snow, they can see
that one of the urchins, Jenks, has fallen through a thin
patch of ice and is in danger of sinking to the bottom of
the harbor. His two friends are trying to pull him out of
the hole, but he's too heavy. The children are roughly 30
feet away, A character within arm’s reach of Jenks can
use an action to try to pull the boy fram the cold water,
doing so with a successful DC 11 Strength (Athletics)
check. If no adult comes to Jenks's aid within 1 minute
of his falling through the ice, he sinks below the surface
and begins to drown as the cold water overcomes him.

If the characters find themselves outmatched by the
Zhents, help comes in two forms. Two Harper spies
sent by Remallia Haventree (see appendix B) appear
on the scene. Their names are Salazar Lorrance (CG
male Tethyrian human) and Mavia Oxlander (NG female
Chondathan human). If the battle doesn't turn quickly in
the party's favor, Grinda Garloth (see area D2) appears
and uses her magic to aid them.

NEXT ENCOUNTER

Armed with information from Agorn Fuoco or his hire-
coach driver, the characters might feel compelled to pay
a visit to Yellowspire in the Castle Ward, Proceed with
__encounter 7, “Old Tower.”

WCHAPTER 4 | DRAGON SEASON

ENCOUNTER 3:
STREET CHASE

For this encounter, use the chase rules and the Urban
Chase Complications table in chapter 8 of the Dungeon
Master's Guide. The chase plays out as a “theater of the
mind” experience. Consequently, you don’t need a map
to run the encounter. The chase occurs outdoors, so be
mindful of any weather effects in play.

STREET CHASE: SPRING

A kenku in cahoots with the Xanathar Guild has the
Stone of Golorr and is running through the streets with
it. The kenku is 60 feet away from the characters at the
start of the chase.

If at any point the kenku is incapacitated, another
kenku previously hidden by the rain or fog joins the
chase, acting next in the initiative count. It suddently
appears, snatches the stone, and flees with it.

NEXT ENCOUNTER

When the characters are close to catching the kenku, or
when yvou want the chase to end, the creature ducks into
an old tower. Proceed with encounter 7, “Old Tower.”

STREET CHASE: SUMMER

The characters are pursuing Lord Cassalanter’s doppel-
ganger valet, Willifort, as he flees in a hire-coach or on
foot. The chase takes place on crowded streets, in front
of agog spectators.

[f you haven't been tracking the distance between the
doppelganger and the characters, assume the charac-
ters are 120 feet away from their quarry at the start of
the chase if Willifort is traveling by hire-coach, or 60
feet away if the doppelganger is on foot. The hire-coach
has an initiative modifier of +0, and Willifort moves with
it. A creature in the hire-coach doesn't need to roll on
the Urban Chase Complications table on its turn.

CROWDED STREET

[f Willifort flees in a hire-coach, his getaway is thwarted
on the third round of the chase when a large crowd
blocks the road, forcing the hire-coach to stop. (If the
chase occurs on Founders' Day, the crowd is part of the
holiday celebration.) The doppelganger jumps out of the
hire-coach on his next turn and makes his way through
the crowd on foot.

Any creature in the crowd has half cover, and any at-
tack that misses the creature because of the cover hits
an innocent commoner instead.

[f Willifort is incapacitated, a raven abrubtly swoops
down, acting next in the initiative count. It snatches the
stone and flees with it, This raven is a shapechanged
imp that works for Lady Cassalanter.

STREET URCHINS

The chase ends when three street urchins (see “The
Three Urchins,” page 63) steal the stone, either by
pickpocketing it from the doppelganger or by shooting a
toy arrow at the raven and causing it to drop the stone.



@@@ 10 @@@



Once they have the stone, the street urchins quickly
lose themselves in the crowd. If Willifort the doppel-
ganger is still around, he tries to slip away, believing he
still has the stone. The imp, if present, turns invisible
and circles above the crowd in a futile attempt to find
the stone.

A character can use an action to search the crowded
street by making a DC 17 Wisdom (Perception) check.
On a successful check, the character spots an iron
grate in the street that wasn't closed properly. Lifting it
reveals an iron ladder that descends 10 feet to an under-
ground sewer tunnel, Characters who lower themselves
into the tunnel can hear the sounds of splashing water
and children’s voices in the distance and might decide to
follow them. (The children are holding hands in the dark

and being guided by Squiddly, who has darkvision.)

NEXT ENCOUNTER

If the characters lollow the street urchins into the sewer,
proceed with encounter 9, “Cellar Complex.”

STREET CHASE: WINTER

After leaving the theater, the characters resume their
pursuit of the elusive Zhent spy, Vevette Blackwater (CE
female Tethyrian human swashbuckler; see appendix
B). She leads them on a merry chase through snowy
streets until she is finally caught or until the characters
give up the chase. She starts 30 feet away from the char-
acters. If forced to make an ability check or saving throw
because of a chase complication, she has advantage on
the roll. Also, she can use the Dash action during the
chase without having to make Constitution checks to
avoid exhaustion.

WHERE'S THE STONE?
If she is caught, Vevette surrenders. She's counting on
the law to protect her from serious harm, and she knows
she has done nothing to warrant arrest. Vevette no lon-
ger has the Stone of Golorr, after parting with it back in
the theater. She doesn't willingly divulge who has the
stone, though the characters can pry the information
from her using a charm person spell or similar magic.
If the characters return to the theater, Remallia
Haventree (see appendix B) waves them over and tells
them that she saw two people exit the theater shortly
after they did and then depart together in a hire-coach
shortly thereafter. One of them is a bard named Agorn
Fuoco, the other a woman unknown to Lady Haventree.
Both Remallia and Vevette know that Agorn spends
time around the dangerous dockside neighborhood of
Mistshore.

NEXT ENCOUNTER
Proceed with encounter 2, “Mistshore.”

ENCOUNTER 4: MAUSOLEUM

The City of the Dead is a public park dotted with mauso-
leums. The place is closed at night, with two City Guard
soldiers (guards) stationed at each entry gate. A charac-

ter can slip over a wall undetected with a successful DC
15 Dexterity (Stealth) check.

At dusk, hundreds of driftglobes make their way from
the inhabited part of the city and congregate in the City
of the Dead. They spend the night here, then disperse
and return to the waking city at dawn—for a reason no
one knows,

Sir Ambrose Everdawn (LG male human Tethyrian
knight), an aging servant of Kelemvor (god of the dead),
patrols the cemetery from sunset to sunrise, chasing off
grave robbers and making sure the dead stay buried.
Characters who creep around the cemetery in the dark
have a 30 percent chance of running into him. If that
happens, he escorts them out and alerts the City Guard
if they refuse to leave.

AREAS OF THE MAUSOLEUM

Rooms in the mausoleum have 8-foot-high ceilings, with
6-foot-high passages and doorways connecting them.
The following locations are keyed to map 4.3.

MI. GrOUND LEVEL

Unless the text of an encounter says otherwise, the
stone double door to the mausoleum is locked. The lock
can be picked by a character who makes a successful
DC 15 Dexterity check using thieves’ tools, or the door
can be forced open with a successful DC 25 Strength
(Athletics) check.

Inside, a family emblem is emblazoned on the floor
between four ostentatious marble coffins. The coffins,
engraved with the names of those interred within, con-
tain nothing but dust and bones.

M2. UNDERGROUND CRYPTS

Empty sconces adorn the walls. Cobwebs and dust indi-
cate that no one has tended to this place in a long time.
Stone coffins in alcoves contain dust and bones.

MAUSOLEUM: SPRING

This encounter begins when the characters come to the
(Garloth mausoleum seeking the Stone of Golorr. The
double door to the mausoleum is open when they arrive.

Earlier, Grinda Garloth's rat familiar arrived to iind
the mausoleum open and grave robbers inside. They
killed the rat, took the stone, and fled along with the
skeletal remains of Grinda's ancestors. Characters who
search the plundered crypts find neither the rat nor the
stone, but they do find a clue left behind by one of the
grave robbers (see "Crypt Clue” below). As the char-
acters make their way out, Xanathar Guild members
attack them in an attempt to retrieve the stone.

CrypT CLUE 3
Characters who search the underground crypts can find 4
a shiny steel key lying in the dust on the floor. One of the Z

grave robbers dropped it while looting the crypts.
The characters can take the key to the Metal House 4
of Wonders, the guildhall of the Splendid Order of Ar- R 'Y
morers, Locksmiths, and Finesmiths in the Dock Ward, |
or to any local locksmith. In either place, someone can
identify the kev as the handiwork of a dwarf locksmith
in the Trades Ward named Elaspra Ulmarr. Characters
who visit Elaspra’s shop can learn from her that she
made a key for a client who bought one of her excellent

CHAPTER 4 | DRAGON SEASON



@@@ 11 @@@



locks. She even installed the lock for him. Elaspra won't
easily divulge the name of the client or his place of resi-
dence. She has great respect for the Harpers, however;
a character who belongs to this faction and produces a
Harper pin to prove it can pry the information from her
with a successful DC 13 Charisma (Persuasion) check.
A character pretending to be a Harper can fool her with
a successful DC 16 Charisma (Deception) check.

Otherwise, the characters must either compel Elaspra
to release the information using magic, or they must
sneak a peek at her records, which she keeps in an iron
safe that can be opened with a knock spell or similar
magic. To pick the combination lock on the safe, a char-
acter must succeed on three DC 20 Dexterity (Investi-
gation) checks in a row. Each attempt made to pick the
lock requires an action.

From Elaspra or her records, the characters learn
that she sold the key to a man named Volkarr Kibbens,
whose address is an old windmill in the Southern Ward.
The key unlocks the door to his apartment, which he
shares with another man named Urlaster Ghann.

XANATHAR GUILD AMBUSH

As the characters leave the mausoleum, they are jumped
by four duergar, members of the Xanathar Guild, who
slipped past the cemetery guards using their invisibility.
The leader, Gorath, accosts the characters in Dwarvish,
demands the Stone of Golorr, and refuses to believe that
they don't have it. If the stone isn’t turned over to them
promptly, the duergar enlarge themselves and attack.
Xanathar watches the battle unfold through the eyes of a
gazer (see appendix B), which stays out of the fight and
tries to remain unseen.

[f this encounter occurs at night, there's a 50 percent
chance that Ambrose Everdawn hears the disturbance
and investigates, arriving after two duergar fall in battle.
The characters can convince him that they're not grave
robbers with a successful DC 15 Charisma (Persuasion)
check. If they're polite, Ambrose escorts them out of the
City of the Dead and warns them not to trespass again.
Otherwise, he attempts to subdue them and turn them
over to the City Guard.

NEXT ENCOUNTER
Once they trace the key to its owner, the characters can
head to the Southern Ward in search of Volkarr Kib-

bens. The spring chain continues with encounter 10,
“Converted Windmill."

il B o | .

ViLLAIN LAIRS

Chapters 5 through 8 describe the lairs of the main vil-
lains. The characters might want to explore the lairs for a
variety of reasons, including the following:

« Disrupting the villain's operation

« Gaining an audience with the villain (perhaps to forge a
truce or an alliance)

« Completing a special mission for a faction (see “Joining
Factions,” page 34)

. Investigating a false clue given to them as part of a
scheme concocted by another villain

« Stealing the Stone of Golorr if the villain has it, or finding
leads on its whereabouts when the trail goes cold

CHAPTER 4 | DRAGON SEASON

MAUSOLEUM: SUMMER

The characters travel to the City of the Dead, which is
open to the public from dawn until dusk. One well-main-
tained mausoleum has the name CASSALANTER
engraved above its entrance. The outer door is locked
when the characters arrive in search of the Stone of
(rolorr. A successful DC 20 Intelligence (Investigation)
check reveals that it has been opened recently, as evi-
denced by dirt smears on the door. A character can try
to pick the lock using thieves’ tools, doing so with a sue-
cessful DC 15 Dexterity check. A knock spell or similar
magic also opens the door.

Human footprints crisscross through the dust on the
upper level. A search of the underground crypt reveals
the bodies of three humans—two males and a female,
all dressed in hooded robes, Further inspection reveals
that the woman is still breathing (unconscious with 0
hit points).

LEFT FOR DEAD

The three cultists were low-ranking members of Victoro
Cassalanter’s cult of Asmodeus. They were betrayed

by two cult fanatics acting on orders from Lord Cas-
salanter, who not only wants the Stone of Golorr but
also, as a security precaution, intends to eliminate cult
members who know too much about it. These three cult-
ists were felled by daggers and inflict wounds spells.

The survivor is Vaelle Lurval (LE female Tethyrian
human cultist), a 30-yvear-old Waterdavian florist. She
was brought into the cult by her boyfriend, Holiver Torn-
rudder, who lies dead nearby. The other dead cultist is
named Kaeth Warloon.

If she is healed, Vaelle regains consciousness. She
reveals that the cult fanatics, Arn Xalrondar and Sefha
Naelrvke, would likely have taken the stone to an old
windmill in the Southern Ward, where they hold their
own ceremonies worshiping Asmodeus. Vaelle can
provide directions, or she can lead characters there if
she is healed fully, for the sake of avenging her mur-
dered lover.

Vaelle believes that the cult fanatics acted on their
own, not under Lord Cassalanter’s orders. She won't
reveal the Cassalanters as the leaders of the cult unless
magically compelled to do so.

NEXT ENCOUNTER
Proceed with encounter 10, “Converted Windmill.”

MAUSOLEUM: WINTER

The Stone of Golorr has revealed that the Vault of Drag-
ons lies beneath the Brandath family mausoleum in the
City of the Dead. The characters are unlikely to know
it, but the Brandath family is an old one. Lord Dagult
Neverember married inta it for its wealth, and Lady
Brandath gave birth to his son, Renaer. It’s a dark irony
that Neverember entrusted the location of his embezzled
gold to his dead wife's family. Renaer Neverember would
be horrified but not surprised to learn the truth.

The cemetery is buried in snow, and though some
visitors are drawn to its scenic beauty even in winter,
the blizzard keeps most of them away. The crumbling



@@@ 12 @@@



T
. Ground Level

>

2/ 4

! i

- R W RN R W NN NE Y DN VO BN -
7\ : =g

T RaNTL 1.._“:.l - N
rt A K

/N7

Sy

=K catacombs

\S

T
R
l..—.r——-—
= AV
1 square = 5 feet
Map 4.3: MAUSOLEUM

mausoleum is sealed tight, and the name BRANDATH

is etched above its entrance. Large elm and birch trees
grow around the structure, sheltering it as best they can
with their leafless boughs.

GUARDIAN TREANT

The largest tree growing in front of the entrance is a
treant. [t awakens when one or more creatures ap-
proach the entrance and growls, “Only those of Bran-
dath blood are welcome here! Begone!” The treant is
particularly surly, it being winter and all.

[f someone other than a Brandath descendant tries to
open the mausoleum, the treant animates two nearby
trees and then attacks. The treant and its animated al-
lies are too big to enter the mausoleum.

The characters can kill the treant, try to slip past it, or
retreat until they learn more about the Brandath family.
A day’s research followed by a successful DC 10 Intelli-
gence (Investigation) check reveals that the characters
know one such person: Renaer Neverember. If they ask
Renaer to admit them to the Brandath family mauso-
leum, he agrees to do so. Because the treant can sense
that Renaer has Brandath blood in his veins, it allows
him and those he calls his friends to enter unmolested,
and says to Renaer in passing, “Your mother was a
lovely person.”

GLYPH OF WARDING

A glvph of warding spell has been cast on the first step
leading down to the underground level, set to trigger
when a humanoid creature passes over the step. The

glyph can't be spotted unless the dust on the floor is
cleared away by a gust of wind spell or some other
means. Once the dust is swept aside, a character who
searches the stairs notices the glyph with a successful
DC 15 Intelligence (Investigation) check.

If the glyph is triggered, it erupts with magical fire in
a 20-foot-radius sphere centered on it. The fire spreads
around corners. Each creature in the area must make
a DC 15 Dexterity saving throw, taking 22 (5d8) fire
damage on a failed saving throw, or half as much dam-
age on a successful one. The glyph disappears after it is
triggered.

ULD's RESTING PLACE

A detect magic spell reveals an aura of transmutation
that emanates from one of the stone coffins on the un-
derground level. This erypt contains the shattered bones
of Uld Brandath, a Waterdavian magister who died in

a freak accident decades ago. (A gargoyle broke off the
corner of a government building and fell on Uld, crush-
ing him.) Guarding his remains are six crawling claws
made from the hands of murderers who were sentenced 7
to death by Uld. These undead hands spring out and at- X e,

tack when the lid is lifted or shoved aside. A\
Treasure. Lying amid the bones is Uld's headband e N
of intellect, which the characters can retrieve once the %j
crawling claws are dealt with. 7

PATH TO THE VAULT

The collapsed eastern end of the underground level is
actually an illusion that conceals an intact, 10-foot-wide

CHAPTER 4 | DRAGON SEASON



@@@ 13 @@@



passageway that slopes down. The characters can walk
right through the illusion, which has no substance, and
a dispel magic spell destroys it. The tunnel wends down-
ward for several hundred feet, gradually widening to 20
feet where it ends at the doors to the Vault of Dragons.

RoorFrop CHASE COMPLICATIONS

d20  Complication

1 You come to a 10-foot-wide gap between rooftops.
You can jump over the gap if your Strength is 10 or
higher (each foot you clear costs 1 foot of move-
ment), and you must succeed on a DC 10 Dexter-
ity (Acrobatics) check or fall prone on the far roof-
top. Or you can cross the gap using a 10-foot-long
rope line that stretches between the two rooftops;
each foot of rope line costs 2 feet of movement.

2 You come to a rooftop that's 10 feet higher than
the one you're on. Make a DC 10 Strength (Athlet-
ics) check. On a failed check, the height change
counts as 10 feet of difficult terrain.

3 You come to a rocftop that's 10 feet lower than
the one you're on. Make a DC 10 Strength (Athlet-
ics) check to jump down safely. On a failed check,
you take damage from the fall and land prone.

4 A roof is slippery. Make a DC 10 Dexterity saving
throw. On a failed save, you fall prone.

5 You step on a rotten section of roof, and it col-
lapses underneath you. Make a DC 15 Dexterity
saving throw. On a failed save, you fall partway
into the hole in the roof and become stuck. While
stuck, you are prone and restrained. You can use
an action on your turn to make a DC 10 Strength
(Athletics) or Dexterity (Acrobatics) check, ending
the effect on a success.

6 Roof shingles or tiles give way as you step on
them. Make a DC 15 Dexterity saving throw. On a
failed save, you fall prone and slide 10 feet back.

7 A rooftop protuberance such as a chimney or
weather vane gets in your way. Make a DC 10 Dex-
terity (Acrobatics) check. On a failed check, the
obstacle counts as 5 feet of difficult terrain.

8 You startle a flock of birds nesting on the rooftop,
and they flutter all around you. Make a DC 10
Dexterity saving throw. On a failed save, the birds
count as 10 feet of difficult terrain,

4 You trigger a glyph of warding spell placed on the
roof to discourage burglars. Make a DC 13 Wis-
dom saving throw. On a failed save, you are tar-
geted by a Tasha's hideous laughter spell, the effect
of which lasts 1 minute.

10 Someone on the ground throws a rock, a snow-
ball, or a similar projectile at you. Make a DC 10
Dexterity saving throw. On a failed save, the attack
deals no damage but distracts you and courts as 5
feet of difficult terrain.

11-20 No complication.

CHAPTER 4 | DRAGON SEASON

ENCOUNTER H:
RooOFTOP CHASE

This encounter uses the chase rules in chapter 8 of the
Dungeon Master’s Guide. It also uses the Rooftop Chase
Complications table, which applies only to creatures
moving across rooftops on foot. Flying creatures needn't
roll on the table.

RoOFTOP CHASE: SUMMER

The characters are trying to catch up with three spined
devils that keep low above the rooftops, so as not to be
seen by Waterdeep's Griffon Cavalry. The devils are 100
feet away from the characters at the start of the chase.

[f the devil carrving the Stone of Golorr becomes
incapacitated, another devil snatches the stone and
flees with it.

NEXT ENCOUNTER

When the characters are close to getting the stone, or
when you want the chase to end, all remaining spined
devils duck into an alley. If the characters lose their
quarry, they can question city folk on the ground who
saw where the devils went. Continue with encounter
1, “Alley.”

RoorTor CHASE: AUTUMN

The characters are chasing two drow gunslingers (sce
appendix B) across windy rooftops in the Dock Ward.
The drow stick together as they run, but each one acts
on his own initiative count.

Fel'rekt Lafeen and Krebbyg Masq'il'yr start out 40
feet ahead of their pursuers. They do nothing but move
on their turns, trying to put as much distance between
themselves and the characters as possible. Fel'rekt has
the Stone of Golorr at the start of the chase, but one
drow gunslinger can pass the stone to the other as a
reaction as long as the two drow are within 10 feet of
each other.

NEXT ENCOUNTER

The drow keep running across the rooftops until they
get to the run-down dockside neighborhood known as
Mistshore. Characters who remain in pursuit can follow
them all the way there. If all the characters lose their
quarry, they can question city folk on the ground who
saw the drow heading toward Mistshore. In either case,
proceed with encounter 2, “Mistshore.”

RoorTor CHASE: WINTER

A Zhent named Vevette Blackwater (CE female
Tethyrian human swashbuckler; see appendix B) has
snatched the Stone of Golorr and is fleeing as fast as she
can across icy rooftops during a blizzard. Characters
who intend to pursue her are 60 feet away from their
quarry at the start of the chase and must also take to the
rooftops or lose sight of her.

Vevette was a vicious pirate before she joined the
Zhentarim and rose to become one of Manshoon's
favored lieutenants. She cackles madly in the face of



@@@ 14 @@@



danger and loves a good chase. She knows the streets,
alleys, and rooftops of Waterdeep well. If forced to make
an ability check or a saving throw because of a chase
complication, she has advantage on the roll. Also, she
can take the Dash action during the chase without hav-
ing to make Constitution checks to avoid exhaustion.

NEXT ENCOUNTER

The chase lasts no more than 5 rounds, after which
Vevette drops to the ground and ducks into a theater.
Characters who lose sight of her can ask people along
her path to help them out. Continue with encounter 6,
“Theater.”

ENCOUNTER 6: THEATER

Whether the theater is open for business or shut down,
it has the following features:

. Ceilings in the rooms are 10 feet high except in area
P5, which has a 20-foot-high raftered ceiling. Con-

necting the rooms are 8-foot-high passages and 7-foot-

high doorways.

« The theater is lit by lanterns that have continual flame
spells cast on them. Speaking a command word in-
side the theater causes the lights in the theater and
backstage to dim; speaking another command word
inside the theater restores them to full brightness. All
the stage managers know the command words.

AREAS OF THE THEATER

The following locations are keyed to map 4.4.

Pl. LoBBY

This plush lobby is decorated with red carpet and ornate
wallpaper. On display here are several painted wooden
mannequins dressed in fancy costumes, each one repre-
senting a character from a famous play.

P2. TICKET BOOTHS

The western door on each booth is locked. The lock
can be picked by a character who succeeds on a DC 135
Dexterity check using thieves’ tools, or the door can
be forced open with a successful DC 13 Strength (Ath-
letics) check. The ticket sellers and the stage manager
have keys to these doors.

A stack of torn tickets sits on a shelf beneath a counter
inside the booth. Prior to a show, each booth holds a
ticket seller (commoner). Admission to the theater is 1
Sp per person.

P3. TiIcKET OFFICES
A desk near the far wall in each of these rooms contains
notebooks, papers, and a lockbox.

Treasure. The house managers hold the key to each
lockbox. A lock can be picked by someone who makes a
successful DC 12 Dexterity check using thieves' tools,
or a lockbox can be forced open with a successful DC
15 Strength (Athletics) check. During a performance,

CHAPIER 4 | DRAGON SEASON }



@@@ 15 @@@



LYo L = P

\

- . \-fﬂ: e — - J,ﬁ.ﬁ?’.ﬂf!’-‘ .- TS
7 g + VRS R
- H— - e’
CJ /
=

| - : ‘
B .r:f#:?ﬂr}- ks

'
e R P -

b

R,

N S !

J

. f J 1 7 = f == o =

= - =

Rl u i

o e e Jiefu

e —

- R 7 q.,.,,.,m-.--u-w-;'ﬁ

NS AR 7SS BT

—

e

N7

— . e I — i

-

"~"?§
e —

<a|
ir . "l: u‘t -
g‘f'f/ U
n\:ﬂal\f (s
_=“

LS a

— == P . 1:--' 1.-1.111.1:-
E ® :E\

[

- ——
NZ A
.-::}

‘;; : lw" \:u'

\"' L1
1

i |

. 1 square = 5 feet
| 1 P

Map 4.4: THEATER

ey "
SRR

each lockbox holds 10d10 sp. After a performance, both
boxes are empty.

P4. AUDITORIUM
The auditorium has the following features:

» Cushioned seats are arranged in seven tiered rows
facing a S5-foot-high wooden stage. Each row has

twenty seats.
+ Behind a raised red curtain are painted backdrops
and stage props for the current production.

During a performance, a stage manager (commoner)
watches from the back of the seating area.

P5. WING

This small offstage area is painted black and has a table
that holds fake daggers, swords, and other props. Prop
weapons can be used in combat but deal only 1 blud-
geoning damage on a hit.

P6. STAGE MANAGER’'S OFFICE
This room holds a desk covered in papers. The stage

‘ P7. GREEN RooM

A trio of mismatched couches and a stained beige rug
are the main features of this room, whose walls are
covered with light green paint. This is where the ac-
tors congregate when they aren’t on stage or in their
dressing rooms.

B CHAPTER 4 | DRAGON SEASON

manager (commoner) stays here between performances.

\r_——-———

S 8 g = o4 v - - Pl

IR RS N NS N NN T ¢
sy V]
i,

P8. DrRESSING ROOMS

This room contains clothes racks, tables lined with
makeup, and long wall mirrors. During or immediately
before a performance, each dressing room holds 1d3

actors (commoners).

THEATER: SPRING

The name of the Pink Flumph theater is displayed on
a sign mounted to the building's facade. Posters on
the outside walls advertise the latest shows, Meet the
Goodberrys and Kiss of the Lamia. The former is a com-
ical glimpse into the travails of a large halfling family
engaged in illicit criminal activity. The latter is a tragic
play about an evil Mulhorandi prince who is banished to
a desert, charmed by a lamia, and sent back with power-
ful magic items to conquer his homeland in her name.
In the early hours of the morning, the backstage area
is abuzz with halfling actors donning costumes, wigs,
and makeup in preparation for the afternoon’s show,
As that show wraps, the cast and musicians for the
evening's tragic fare arrive. The actor who plays the
evil prince is a woman named Yaliek Iltizmar (N female
Rashemi bard; see appendix B), who is also a member
of the Harpers. She pays close attention to characters
who nose around backstage, then shares any interesting
revelations with Remallia Haventree (see appendix B) at
the earliest opportunity. If Remallia learns the location
of the Vault of Dragons, she sees that the information
reaches the Lords of Waterdeep by conveying it to Mirt.



@@@ 16 @@@



THEATER OWNER

The owner of the Pink Flumph, Iokaste Daliano (N
female Tethyrian commoner), is a selfish, middle-aged
widow with no great love of theater, The Pink Flumph
was her husband’s passion; for lokaste, it's strictly a
means through which she can rub shoulders with the
city’s elite. She requires the directors to choose plays
and hire actors, while she spends her time “on the job”
greeting important guests and promising them the fin-
est entertainment. She treats her actors and staff like
half-forgotten children, and she turns away characters
who come to the theater seeking the Vault of Dragons
unless there's something in it for her. Appealing to her
greed backfires, since lokaste wants all the treasure
for herself.

PATH TO THE VAULT
One of the dressing rooms (area P8) contains a secret
trapdoor in the floor that no one knows about. It can be
found with a successful DC 20 Wisdom (Perception)
check. This stone door has an arcane lock spell cast
on it and can be pulled open with a successful DC 30
Strength (Athletics) check. A knock spell or similar
magic also does the trick.

Below the trapdoor is a 30-foot-deep shaft containing
a wooden ladder. Characters who descend the ladder
find themselves at one end of a 20-foot-wide stone pas-
sageway that gradually slopes down 100 feet before end-
ing at the entrance to the Vault of Dragons.

WISHES THE FAERIE DRAGCON

lokaste's late husband, Algondar Daliano, had a violet
faerie dragon companion named Wishes. The faerie
dragon detests lokaste but remains on the payroll,
begrudgingly using its magic to enhance performances
for the sake of preserving Algondar’s legacy. It prefers to
remain invisible and unseen otherwise. lokaste refers to
it derisively as “the flying serpent.”

If the characters threaten it or endanger the theater,
Wishes uses its magic to confound and neutralize them.
As they make their way to the Vault of Dragons, it fol-
lows them invisibly. Once it learns about the gold in the
vault, the faerie dragon casts mirror image on itself,
turns visible, and addresses the characters telepathi-
cally. It demands a share of the hoard (at least 5,000
gp), threatens to tip off the City Watch if the characters
refuse, and makes good on its threat if the characters
don't share the wealth. The faerie dragon doesn't have
a hoard of its own, since it gives its earnings to unfor-
tunate Waterdavians by invisibly flving around the city
at night and leaving coins on doorsteps, window sills,
nightstands, and pillows.

THEATER: AUTUMN

At the end of their previous encounter, the characters
are no closer to finding the Stone of Golorr. Jarlaxle

is waiting for them at the Seven Masks Theater in the
Dock Ward. The theater caters to a lower-class clientele,
and ship captains and sailors are admitted for free. The
owner of the theater is a burly and jovial Shou man with
a braided goatee named Rongquan Mystere—another of
Jarlaxle's many disguises. When Jarlaxle is away, he en-
trusts his stage managers to look after things.

——

SAPPHIRIA'S BooTy

When the characters first arrive, all doors except the
ones leading backstage are locked, Characters who slip
in through the back see actors and stagehands bustling
about and the director arguing with the playwright while
the stage manager looks on helplessly. On the stage,
actors walk through their scenes and read their lines

to a mostly empty theater. Watching the rehearsal from
the front row while smoking a pipe is Jarlaxle Baenre
(see appendix B), disguised as Rongquan. Hidden in the
shadows in various spots are four drow elite warriors
ready to fight by Jarlaxle’s side.

The play, Sappfiiria’s Booty, is a romantic comedy
about a blue-haired madam named Sapphiria who runs
a thieves' guild out of a festhall. When a charming sea
captain arrives with a hold full of booty from a faraway
land, Sapphiria decides to steal it. Zaniness ensues
when she falls in love with the first mate, who is half her
age, while the captain falls in love with her. On one side
of the stage is a backdrop resembling the deck of a ship;
the other side is decorated to look like a madam's parlor
in a brothel, complete with a gaudy chandelier and a
fainting couch.

Westra Moltimmur (CG female 1)luskan human com-
moner with Insight +2 and Performance +6), the play's
leading lady, is one of Waterdeep's great treasures, and
the cast and crew are very protective of her. Now in her
seventies and having been married no fewer than seven
times, she has a brisk sense of humor and a zest for life.
She's also insightful enough to know that “Rongquan
Mystere” isn't what he appears to be. She has seen the
dark elves who watch over Rongquan and observed him
using subtle hand gestures (Drow Sign Language) to
communicate with them.

SPEAKING WITH RONGQUAN
Jarlaxle has instructed the stage managers to bring all
visitors to him. In the guise of Rongquan, he claims to
be a member of the Lords’ Alliance who answers di-
rectly to Laeral Silverhand. He also seems to know all
about the characters' meeting with Laeral (see encoun-
ter 1, “Alley”) and says he can speak on her behalf. He
asks about the Stone of Golorr and is disappointed if the
characters don't have it. If they offer up the fake stone
recovered in encounter 9, “Cellar Complex,” Rongquan
immediately realizes it's a fake.

If the characters aren’t sure what to do next, jariaxle
imparts the following information:

CHAPTER 4 | DRAGON SEASON 8



@@@ 17 @@@



“My friends, don't be discouraged. The wind is blowing
in our direction! |'ve learned that Fenerus Stormcastle
was arrested by the City Watch for theft and taken to a
courthouse in the Castle Ward to face the judgment of
2 magister. Mo doubt he hid the stone before his cap-
ture. You must speak to him right away. You'll need to
devise some sort of ruse to get close to Fenerus. | urge
against violence, or you might find yourself locked up

beside him."
1 .

If the characters ask why Laeral Silverhand doesn't
question Fenerus herself or bail him out of jail, Jarlaxle
laughs and says it would be politically unwise for the
Open Lord to be seen negotiating with a man who has
committed heinous erimes against the city.

Jarlaxle could speak to Fenerus himself, but he's not
sure if the courthouse is warded against magic. He can't
risk the exposure, so he sends the characters instead. If
the characters refuse to work for Rongquan, he shrugs
his broad shoulders and lets them leave unmolested, fig-
uring they’ll try to talk to Fenerus anyway.

[f the characters attack him, Jarlaxle smiles, whistles
for his drow bodyguards, and has at them. If the char-
acters fall in combat, Jarlaxle and his guards stabilize
dving party members before dragging all of them to a
snowy alley and leaving them there with their gear. Af-
ter the drow depart, a cold wind tears through the alley
and awakens the unconscious characters,

NEXT ENCOUNTER
If the characters decide to speak with Fenerus, proceed
with encounter 8, “Courthouse.”

THEATER: WINTER

As this encounter opens, the characters follow a flee-
ing Zhent swashbuckler into a theater in the Trades
Ward called the Brizzenbright. Named after Malkolm
Brizzenbright, its dead owner, the establishment has
struggled in recent years. It stays open in the winter for
its own survival, but the theater is wickedly cold this
time of year.

BRIZZENBRIGHT'S GHOST
Malkolm Brizzenbright, a ghost, greets all visitors in the
lobby (area P1). Dressed in a suit, his hair unkempt, he
floats in plain sight most of the time, waving his hands
about in gestures of greeting and salutation. Locals are
accustomed to his spectral form and his stock introduc-
tion: “Let not this harried visage diminish vou, gentle-
sirs and beautiful ladies, for I am but your friendly host.
What fine art have we wrought for you this day? Buy
your tickets and behold! You shan't be disappointed!”
The ghost can engage in light conversation. It is
bound to the theater because Malkolm Brizzenbright's
soul couldn’t bear to leave the place. If the theater were
to close down, the ghost would haunt it still, perhaps
becoming more deranged over time. Only razing or
burning the theater to the ground can force his spirit to
depart forever.

FCHAPTER 4 | DRAGON SEASON

v E o :

SNAKES IN THE HOUSE

After a harrowing rooftop chase, Vevette Blackwater
(CE female Tethyrian human swashbuckler; see appen-
dix B) has bought a ticket and slipped into the theater
during a performance of Blood Wedding—a play about
love, jealousy, and death. In the story, a voung woman

is brought to a castle by a count, only to fall in love with
his vounger brother, a man of faith. Her betrayal eats
away at the jealous count. He murders his brother on
his wedding day and pursues the bride, who hurls her-
self off the castle battlements in despair. The count is
cursed by the gods and transformed into a creature of
darkness, damned to live in his castle and feed on blood.
A female cellist and two male violinists provide musical
accompaniment.

The shivering audience includes thirty commoners.
Also present is a Zhentarim spy named Agorn Fuoco
(NE male Turami bard; see appendix B) and his com-
panion, Amath Sercent (LE female Mulan priest of
Bane). Agorn is swept up in the drama and fighting back
tears while Amath pats his arm gently. Vevette takes a
seat behind them and surreptitiously passes the Stone
of Golorr to Agorn. Looking on from the back row is
Remallia Haventree (see appendix B), a member of the
Harpers who suspects Agorn of being a high-ranking
Zhent. She has been watching him for a while now, hop-
ing to identify other Zhentarim leaders in Waterdeep, Al-
though Remallia appears to be alone, the two violinists
(LG male Illuskan human spies with Performance +5)
are Harpers under her command. Agorn and Amath are
unaware that they're under surveillance.

ENTER THE HEROES

The characters are expected to buy tickets before en-
tering the main theater. The house manager chases
after them if they don't, threatening to summon the
City Watch.

A character who makes a successful DC 14 Wisdom
(Perception) check spots Vevette in the darkened the-
ater. When this happens, Vevette springs from her chair
and flees out the nearest door, planning to lead the
characters on another merry chase. Remallia and her
fellow Harpers watch with interest but don't get involved
unless their lives or the lives of innocents are imperiled.

NEXT ENCOUNTER

If the characters take the bait, proceed with encounter
3, “Street Chase.” Once Vevette's pursuers are out of
sight, Agorn Fuoco and Amath Sercent use the distrac-
tion to slip away, exiting through the main doors and
flagging down a hire-coach.

ENCOUNTER 7: OLD TOWER

The characters face enemies in a dilapidated tower built
by some half-forgotten Waterdavian mage hundreds of
years ago. It has the following features:

« All doors are unlocked except the one to area O5.

« The rooms have 15-foot-high ceilings, with 7-foot-high
doorways connecting them.

+ The tower is brightly lit by continual fiame spells cast
on wall sconces.



@@@ 18 @@@



_ : First Floor
</AD !.\"'
% g
Cellar

Map 45: OLo Towen

AREAS OF THE OLD TOWER

The following locations are keyed to map 4.5.

Ol. VESTIBULE
The outer door has a tiny peephole with a closed iron

shutter on the inside. Rotting tapestries adorn the walls,

and mud and dirt have accumulated on the floor.

O2. GROUND LEVEL

Stone spiral stairs curl up into the tower and down into
the cellar. Set into the west wall is a fireplace black-
ened with soot. A burned heap that used to be a padded
leather chair lies near the fireplace.

O3. UrPEr LEVEL
This room, formerly a wizard's laboratory, contains the
following features:

+ A soot-stained fireplace has a lidless iron cauldron
hanging on an iron hook in its hearth and a wizard's
portrait on the wall above the mantelpiece.

+ The floor is littered with shards of broken glass,
burned scraps of paper, twisted pieces of metal, and
bird droppings.

+ Other furnishings include a rocking chair, a trellis
table, and the charred remains of a bookshelf, all
shrouded in thick cobwebs.

« Arrow slits line the walls, and pigeons nest in
the rafters.

Second Floor A

1 square = 5 feet

A

Arrow Slits. Each arrow slit is 4 feet tall and 1 foot
wide—big enough for a Small character or a slim Me-
dium character to squeeze through.

Treasure, A thorough search of the room yields a ran-
dom treasure, determined by rolling a d4 and consulting
the Old Tower Treasure table,

OLp TOWER TREASURE

d4  Treasure

1 Acharred wand of magic missiles (each time a charge
is expended, there's a 50 percent chance that noth-
ing happens and the charge is wasted) ¢

2 Apotion of healing mixed with a potion of flying (if
this mixture is imbibed, roll on the Potion Miscibil-
ity table in chapter 7 of the Dungeon Master’s Guide I
to determine the effect)

3 Acracked driftglobe that emits a flickering light but 3
otherwise functions normally

- A burned scroll tube containing two blank sheets of
paper that are actually paper birds (see appendix A)

O4. CELLAR

This room contains the following features:

+ A small, circular wooden table is surrounded by four
stools made from empty barrels. A marked deck of
playing cards is scattered atop the table, with a few
stray cards lying on the floor.

CHAPTER 4 | DRAGON SEASON



@@@ 19 @@@



+ Three crates are stacked against the south wall. Each
contains a twenty-day supply of edible rations.

+ Set into the north wall is a sturdy oak door with iron
fittings and a built-in lock.

Locked Door. The door to area O5 is locked. The lock
can be picked by a character who uses thieves' tools
and makes a successful DC 20 Dexterity check. The

door can also be forced open with a successful DC 25
Strength (Athletics) check.

O5. TELEPORTATION CIRCLE

Arcane runes are inscribed in a circle on the floor of this
otherwise empty chamber. The circle is a permanent
teleportation circle (see the teleportation circle spell de-
scription in the Player's Handbook).

OLD TOWER: SPRING

The party’s elusive quarry, a kenku, has taken refuge

in an old tower. By the time the characters reach the en-
trance to the tower, the kenku has taken a hostage and
fled to the upper level.

STREET URCHINS

Just prior to the kenku's arrival, three children entered
the derelict tower on a dare. If this encounter occurs
on or around Trolltide, the children are wearing troll
masks. These noncombatants are named Nat, Jenks,
and Squiddly (see “The Three Urchins,” page 63).

The kenku has kidnapped Squiddly and taken him
upstairs (area O3). The characters encounter Nat and
Jenks in area O2; they beg the characters to save their
young tiefling friend.

CONFRONTING THE KENKU

The kenku clutches the Stone of Golorr in one clawed
hand and Squiddly the tiefling in the other. When cor-
nered, the creature mimics the sound of a screaming
child—its way of threatening to harm the boy unless the
characters leave at once. The kenku doesn't respond to
verbal threats ar attempts at persuasion, but it can be
bribed with coin, gemstones, or shiny baubles. It gives
up both the stone and the boy in return for 100 gp worth
of treasure.

If the characters and the kenku reach an impasse,
Squiddly kicks the kenku in the shin, causing it to re-
lease him, and hides under some old furniture. This act
initiates combat as the kenku draws its sword.

If he has a clear path to the stairs, Squiddly runs
down them and rejoins his friends. The three children
flee the tower together, disappearing into a nearby alley.

GAZER ATTACK

When the characters finally obtain the Srone of Golorr,
three gazers (see appendix B) enter area O3 through the
arrow slits and attack. They try to incapacitate which-
ever character has the stone and use their telekinetic
rays to steal it. If successful, the gazers take the stone to
a nearby alley,

CHAPTER 4 | DRAGON SEASON

NEXT ENCOUNTER

Whether the Stone of Golorr leaves the tower in the
possession of the characters or the gazers, proceed with
encounter 1, “Alley.”

OLD TOWER: SUMMER

The old tower, formerly owned by a wizard, was re-
cently bought by Esvele Rosznar, a young noblewoman
with a fascinating alter ego (see “The Black Viper” in
appendix B).

HouSE RoszNAR GUARDS

Esvele has brought four guards with her to the tower.
They wear the livery of House Rosznar and stand guard
in area O1.

BOUGHT AND PAID FOR

Through her network of spies, Esvele learned about
Lord Neverember's friendship with the tower’s previous
owner. Not long thereafter, she found the entrance to the
Vault of Dragons beneath the tower. Unfortunately for
her, she doesn’'t know what keys are needed to enter it or
what lies within. When the characters arrive, Esvele is
in area 02, meeting with the following three guild repre-
sentatives (commoners):

- Sembra Vashir (LN female Calishite human), of the
Carpenters', Roofers, and Plaisterers’ Guild

» Pynt Oomtrowl (CG female rock gnome), of the
Cellarers’ and Plumbers’ Guild

+ Jarbokken Frostbeard (LG male shield dwarf), of
the Guild of Stonecutters, Masons, Potters, and
Tile-makers

This meeting is a formality. As the new owner, Esvele
is required by law to bring the building up to code. She
is gathering cost estimaies from the guilds involved
but has no intention of proceeding with repairs. The
arrival of the characters provides her with a welcome
distraction.

Characters will have a tough time convincing Esvele
that they have come for any reason other than to break
into the Vault of Dragons. Esvele is willing to bring them
on as business partners, allowing them access to the
vault (preferably when there aren’t guild representatives
around) in exchange for an equal share of whatever
treasure it might contain. She and the characters have
each other over a barrel. She can’t have them arrested
for burglary without the authorities discovering the vault
and seizing the tower. And they can’t afford to deny the
noblewoman what she wants, lest she divulge the vault's
location to the authorities in exchange for a reward.

Esvele offers to help the characters obtain the keys
needed to unlock the Vault of Dragons and insists on ac-
companying them during their first foray into the vault,
claiming all the while that she's capable of looking after
herself. However this business with the party unfolds,
she tries to conceal her secret identity from the charac-
ters for as long as possible.

Esvele doesn'’t use a key to lock and unlock the door to
area 05, She uses thieves' tools instead.



@@@ 20 @@@



PATH TO THE VAULT

The entrance to the vault is hidden behind a secret
door in the north wall of area O5. The secret door was
crafted by skilled dwarf engineers and requires a suc-
cessful DC 20 Wisdom (Perception) check to locate.
Esvele has already disarmed a magic trap on the door,
rendering it safe to open. Beyond it lies a dusty staircase
that descends 90 feet to a 20-foot-wide corridor. The
hall extends another 90 feet to the vault doors. To one
side of the vault doors, a natural fissure in the wall once
served as a grick’s lair, but Esvele killed the grick and
left its corpse on the floor,

OrLp TOWER: AUTUMN

The characters come to this crumbling tower in the
Dock Ward looking for the Stone of Golorr. Members
of Bregan D'aerthe follow them invisibly. Superstitious
locals think the tower is haunted, so they avoid it.

ANTIMACGIC FIELD

The interior of the tower is subject to a permanent an-
timagic field spell. Consequently, no magic functions
inside the tower. This effect was left behind by the tow-
er's previous occupant, a wizard hermit who dabbled

in “wild magic” and could no longer control it. Because
of the antimagic field, the magic lights that normally
illuminate the tower have been suppressed. Only a wish
speiil or similar magic can end this antimagic effect.

TOWER SWORDS

Scattered on the floors throughout the tower are six
longswords with no traces of rust or blood on them.
These blades are flying swords rendered inert by the
antimagic field. If a flying sword is taken from the tower,
it animates and attacks.

WHERE'S THE STONE?

Fenerus hid the Stone of Golorr in the cauldron that
hangs in the fireplace on the upper level (area O3). But
it's not there anymore.

Before the characters reach area 03, three drow gun-
slingers (see appendix B) under the effect of potions of
invisibility use their levitate spells to scale the outside of
the tower and craw! through the arrow slits. While they
are inside the tower, their invisibility spells are negated
by the antimagic field. One of the drow quickly finds the
stone and takes it before the characters show up.

Unless they were defeated earlier in the adventure,
these drow are Jarlaxle's lieutenants: Fel'rekt Lafeen,
Krebbyg Masq'il'yr, and Soluun Xibrindas. Replace any
that were killed earlier in the adventure with other drow
gunslingers, and roll initiative for each drow. Soluun {(or
his replacement) can't resist a good fight and attacks the
characters, buying time for the other drow to escape.
Once they're outside the tower, the fleeing drow become
invisible again as they leap onto a nearby rooftop, but
the potions wear off at the end of their next turns, en-
abling characters to chase after them.

NExXT ENCOUNTER

If the characters pursue the fleeing drow, proceed with
encounter 5, “Rooftop Chase.”

OLD TOWER: WINTER

The characters have learned that the Stone of Golorr is
with Amath Sercent, a priest of Bane who is allied with
Manshaoon. She and her acalytes reside in Yellowspire,
a Castle Ward tower so named because its bricks have
a pale vellow tinge to them. Amath is in the midst of
converting the tower into a temple of Bane. A telepor-
tation circle in the basement allows for swift transport
to and from Kolat Towers and Manshoon's extradimen-
sional sanctum.

HOUSE OF TYRANNY

Amath Sercent (LE female Mulan priest) and her four
followers (LE male and female acolytes of mixed ethnic-
ities) dress in common clothing when outside the tower.
Inside the structure, they wear fur-lined robes to stay
warm. They refer to the tower as the House of Tyranny,
and black prints of their right hands, with fingers and
thumb held together, cover every interior surface. These
handprints mimic the symbol of Bane.

Amath and her followers assemble here for worship
but sleep elsewhere. When the characters first arrive,
all five have gathered in prayer on the upper floor of the
tower (area 03). Three black flying smakes nest in the
rafters and join any battle here. During this ceremony,
Amath and her acolytes hold candles and form a circle
around a gagged and blindfolded broadsheet publisher
named Shan Chien (N male Shou human commoner).
The imperious, middle-aged man is shackled to the
floor, and Amath carries the key to the shackles. The
shackles can be broken by a creature that uses an action
to make a successful DC 20 Strength (Athletics) check.
Picking the shackles’ lock requires thieves' tools and a
successful DC 15 Dexterity check.

The Banites' ritual is designed to break Shan's will,
making him subservient to Bane. Amath has been us-
ing this ritual to “turn” broadsheet publishers as part
of a larger plot to control the flow of information in the
city—a critical element of Manshoon's takeover. Shan
was abducted by Amath’s acolytes the night before while
walking to his home in the Trades Ward. He publishes
The Targe, a broadsheet that offers up vitriolic rants on
all manner of local topics, including politics.

Amath has the Stone of Golorr in her pocket. She is
expecting Manshoon or his simulacrum to arrive and
retrieve it shortly.

OUTER SCAFFOLDING

The tower is encircled by wooden scaffolding covered
with ice and snow. Despite its precarious appearance,
the scaffolding is secure and safe to walk on, enabling
creatures to scale the outside of the tower without
having to make ability checks. The scaffolding rattles
and creaks, however, and any creature that moves on it
must succeed on a DC 16 Dexterity (Stealth) check or be
heard by the tower’s occupants.

SIMULACRUM

The characters must fight Amath and her acolytes to
get the Stone of Golorr. When they finally obtain it, fate
deals them an unkind hand as Manshoon’s simulacrum
(see “Manshoon” in appendix B) arrives by way of the

CHAPTER 4 | DRAGON SEASON

@@@ 1 @@@



t g

e

=
(—

S

W7

=7
A=

TN

1/

e rrLg

= S
NSNS -=?"[

-

4

J

<
LR

=
s
|

1— ey -

7=

e
i

e

AN T

= P A /L =14 L .

. Main Level

Map 4.6: CourTHOUSE

. =

teleportation circle in area O5. If the characters had

the opportunity and the foresight to destroy the circle
prior to obtaining the stone, the simulacrum instead
must travel to Yellowspire on foot, giving the characters
ample time to get away before it arrives as long as they
leave within 1 hour after obtaining the stone. The sim-
ulacrum tirelessly pursues the stone, and characters
who flee would do themselves well not to leave tracks
in the snow,

NEXT ENCOUNTER

[f a character becomes attuned to the Stone of Golorr,

it reveals the location of the Vault of Dragons, under the
Brandath family mauscleum in the City of the Dead, and
the three keys needed to enter it. When the characters
are ready to visit the mausoleum, proceed with encoun-
ter 4, “Mausoleum.”

ENCOUNTER 8:
COURTHOUSE

People who are arrested by the City Watch are brought
to a courthouse and detained until a magister can pass
judgment on them. Each courthouse has the follow-
ing features:

« Two guards stand outside each of the front and back
doors (leading to areas H1 and H6) at all hours.

« Rooms have 10-foot-high ceilings, with 8-foot-high
passages and 7-foot-high doorways connecting them.

B CHAPTER 4 | DRAGON SEASON

=

FY SN =

1 square = 5 feet

- Windows are fitted with iron bars that require a suc-
cessful DC 30 Strength (Athletics) check to bend.

« Doors are made of iron-bound oak and unlocked.

- All areas are brightly lit by continual flame spells cast
on wall sconces.

» Cisterns on the roof collect rainwater, which is fun-
neled by pipes down to the showers (area HT7).

AREAS OF THE COURTHOUSE

The following locations are keyed to map 4.6.

HI. UpSTAIRS WAITING RoOM
This room has the following features:

« Two guards stand outside the doors to the records
rooms (area H2) at all hours. Behind a desk sits a
court clerk (commoner),

- Uncomfortable wood benches line the walls. A
copper plaque mounted above each bench says, in
Common, “Please have a seat. Someone will be with
you shortly.”

» Two privies are situated in a corner by the entrance.

Clerk. The clerk asks visitors what their business is
and either directs them to the appropriate area of the
courthouse or instructs them to wait. The clerk holds a
Key to the records rooms (area H2).

H2. Recorps Rooms
The doors to these rooms are locked. Inside, shelves
lining every available inch of wall space hold boxes of



@@@ 2 @@@



papers dated by month and year. These papers are re-
cords of court proceedings and depositions.

H3. CLERKS' OFFICE

Two desks pushed together in the middle of the room
hold quills, ink, and sheets of paper. Two court clerks
(commoners) work here, supporting the magister

on duty. Each clerk holds a key to the records rooms
(area H2).

H4. MAGISTER'S OFFICE

This grand office contains several plush armchairs and
a large walnut desk. The seal of Waterdeep is embla-
zoned on the wood floor.

When not overseeing a trial, a magister on duty at
the courthouse reviews cases and holds meetings here.
If a magister is here, so is a knight who serves as a
bodyguard.

H5. CourTROOM
This room has the following features:

« Two guards are stationed here at all times.
- If court is in session, the magister is here along with a
bodyguard (see area H4) and anyone else pertinent to

the case being tried.

« A magister’s cloth-draped desk faces a defendant’s box
and three rows of pews.

« Hanging on the west wall are tasseled banners de-
picting the coats of arms of the City of Waterdeep, the
Waterdeep City Watch, and the Waterdeep City Guard,
as well as the seal of the Lords of Waterdeep and the
symbol of Tyr, god of justice.

H6. DowNSTAIRS WAITING ROOM

Nobles scheduled to testify in court and those waiting
to visit prisoners are held here. The room contains the
following features:

+ Two guards are on duty in this room at all times.
+ Mismatched couches line the walls.
+ Old broadsheets rest in loose piles atop end tables.

H7. SHOWERS

Dirty prisoners are stripped of their clothing and
washed here before they are locked in cells. Protruding
from the walls are iron nozzles that spew cold water
when a chain next to the door is pulled. Drains in the
stone-tiled floor keep the room from flooding.

H8. CeELL BLOCK

Two guards are stationed in this hall at all times.
Locked Cells. Five cells are spaced along this hall.
The door to each cell is locked from the outside, and the
guards stationed here hold the keys. A door’s lock can't

be picked from inside the cell.

HS. WaTcH WAGON
This room contains the following features:

« Two veterans, members of the City Watch, are here at
all times.

» An armored carriage stands behind a pair of steel
doors secured by an iron bar,

Armored Carriage. Two horses are needed to pull the
carriage, which can hold up to eight Medium prisoners
at a time. The back door to the carriage is secured with
chains and two padlocks. Each veteran on duty has a
key that opens one of the padlocks.

Barred Outer Doors. It takes two people to lift the
bar that obstructs the doors to the outside. A successful
DC 21 Strength (Athletics) check enables one person to
do it alone.

COURTHOUSE: SUMMER

After obtaining the Stone of Golorr, the characters are
arrested by the City Watch soon after they emerge from
the sewers.

UNDER ARREST
The arresting force consists of twelve veterans, a Watch
sergeant and eleven constables. They demand that the
characters surrender their weapons and come along qui-
etly. For guidance on how to handle character arrests,
see “Breaking the Law,” page 10.

The characters are charged with disturbing the peace,
a minor offense that carries a fine and results in an
edict. The charge stems from their conduct in encounter
3, "Street Chase." Depending on how they comported
themselves in previous encounters, the characters might
be charged with additional crimes against the city or its
citizens, possibly including brandishing weapons with-
out due cause, robbery, assaulting a citizen, or murder.
If they resist arrest, they are charged with hampering
justice, See the Code Legal handout in appendix C for
the penalties associated with such crimes.

Characters who give up their visible weapons without
a fuss aren't searched, but those who give the Watch
a hard time are searched for hidden weapons (and
stripped of anything that could potentially cause harmj.
A character can conceal a Tiny object from the Watch
with a successful DC 12 Dexterity (Sleight of Hand)
check. If the Stone of Golorr is found during a search,
the Watch sergeant inspects it, concludes that it's noth-
ing of consequence, and returns it to its owner.

DoOCK WARD COURTHOQUSE

Arrested characters are brought to a courthouse in the
Dock Ward and confined to cells (area H8) until their
trial. Any items taken from them during their arrest are
entrusted to the front desk clerk (area H1) pending the
trial’s outcome, A character can take a short rest while
incarcerated and use that time to attune to the Stane

of Golorr. After 1d6 hours, word comes down that the
magister is prepared to hear the characters’ testimony,
whereupon the guards in area H8 unlock the characters’
cells and escort them to the courtroom (area HS), where
the magister is waiting.

FALSE CAPTAIN
If Lord Cassalanter’s doppelganger valet is still at large,
it kills a Watch captain and uses the victim's uniform

to impersonate another Wartch captain the characters

have met before. Then, in the guise of Hyustus Staget
(see “The Watch Arrives,” page 27), the doppelganger
kills the guards in area H8 with its bare hands and



@@@ 3 @@@



uses their keys to open the characters’ cells. “Hyustus”
warns them that the magister is corrupt and suggests
they flee the city before theyre sentenced to death.
“Hyustus” offers to deliver messages or items of import
on their behalf while they make good their escape. The
doppelganger is hoping that the characters will entrust
the Stone of Golorr to it for safekeeping. Failing that, it
hopes to wrest the stone from them during the chaos of
the jailbreak.

If the characters refuse to play along, the doppel-
ganger cries out in alarm, bringing the full weight of
the courthouse garrison (ten guards and two veterans)
down upon the characters, whom “Hyustus” accuses of
heating the cell block guards to death. These reinforce-
ments have no reason to believe that Captain Staget
isn't who he appears to be, and they side with him in
any conflict.

If the doppelganger obtains the Stone of Golorr, it
promptly delivers it to Victoro Cassalanter. If the char-
acters extricate themselves from the mess they’re in,
they can retrieve the stone from Cassalanter Villa (see

chapter 6).

MEETING WITH THE MAGISTER
The presiding magister is Umbero Zastro, a handsome,
eloquent, and fair-minded half-elf in his thirties. He's
known for his finely honed sense of poetic justice and
for meting out unconventional punishments.

Magister Umbero Zastro has the statistics of a noble,
with these changes:

« He is lawful neutral.

» He is unarmed, unarmored (AC 11), and worth 0 XP.

+ He has these racial traits: He has advantage on saving
throws against being charmed, and magic can't put
him to sleep. He has darkvision out to a range of 60
feet. He speaks Common and Elvish.

The magister has already heard the testimony of the
arresting officers, as well as that of any eyewitnesses.
The characters are given an hour to plead their case
while he asks questions. A character who tries to de-
ceive Zastro must make a Charisma (Deception) check
contested by the magister's Wisdom (Insight) check. A
character who loses this contest is found guilty of ham-
pering justice, locked up for a tenday. and fined 200 gp,
on top of any other punishments meted out for crimes
committed against the city and its citizenry. Those who
can't or won't pay the fine are sentenced to hard labor
for a year in Amendsfarm, a City Guard-run labor camp
among the farms of Undercliff.

If the characters committed one or more crimes, they
are judged guilty and punished accordingly (see the
Code Legal handout in appendix C). A character who
pleads for leniency and succeeds on a DC 14 Charisma

(Persuasion) check receives an alternate punishment for

crimes that don't carry punishments of death or exile.
This check is made with advantage if the character has
renown in a respectable faction, such as Force Grey (the
Gray Hands), the Emerald Enclave, the Harpers, the
Lords’ Alliance, or the Order of the Gauntlet. Alternate
punishments for lesser ¢rimes include the following:

CHAPTER 4 | DRAGON SEASON

» The character must make beds and clean bed-
sheets at local orphanages for a tenday, under guard
supervision.

» The character must report to Morana Huldark, a

dwarf member of the Guild of Watermen, and scrape

barnacles off the docks for a tenday under her close
supervision.

The character must spend the next month delivering

30-pound casks of drinking water to the guards sta-

tioned atop the city walls.

« For a tenday, the character must stand on a particular
street corner every afternoon from highsun to dusk
and, like a broadcrier, shout out the erimes of which
he or she has been found guilty while accepting the
scoldings and verbal lashings of the citizenry.

Characters who are tricked into acting in accordance

with the wishes of the doppelganger can be forgiven for
crimes committed during the jailbreak, but only if the

doppelganger is apprehended or killed. (It reverts to its
true form when it dies.) Speak with dead spells can be
cast on the cell block guards slain by the doppelganger
to obtain testimony that clears the characters of the
guards’ murder.

NEXT ENCOUNTER

If a character becomes attuned to the Stone of Golorr, it
reveals the location of the Vault of Dragons, beneath an
old tower in the Sea Ward, and the three keys needed to
enter it. When the characters are ready to visit the loca-
tion, proceed with encounter 7, “Old Tower.”

COURTHOUSE: AUTUMN

The characters have learned that Fenerus Stormcastle
is in the custody of the City Watch at a courthouse in
the Castle Ward. If they try to speak with him, they are
met by the clerk at the front desk, who informs them
that they must schedule a meeting with the magister
first, because visitors need her written permission to see
him. The clerk says the meeting with the magister can
happen no sooner than highsun on the following day but
can be persuaded to move up the time for a bribe of 10
gp or more,

There are alternatives to speaking with the magister,
if the characters have sufficient renown in a politically
influential faction—or a talent for deception:

- A character who has at least 4 renown in the Harpers
can convince Mirt (see appendix B) to use his author-
ity as a Lord of Waterdeep to secure Fenerus's re-
lease. Mirt has personally lost coin to the Blood Hawk
Posse, so helping Fenerus squirm out of jail stings
him deeply.

+ A character who has at least 4 renown in the Lords’
Alliance can arrange a meeting with Laeral Silver-
hand (see appendix B) at Piergeiron’s Palace and con-
vince her to give Fenerus what he wants in exchange
for information on the stone’s whereabouts. The safe
return of Neverember's cache of dragons is more im-
portant to her than the fate of one brigand.

+ The characters can purposely get themselves arrested
in the Castle Ward, Even a minor crime can result in
a brief period of incarceration until the magister has



@@@ 4 @@@



time to render judgment. In the meantime, characters
can try to speak to Fenerus.

« The characters can try to infiltrate the courthouse
using mundane disguises or magic. Impersonating an
official or using magic to influence one is a crime (see
the Code Legal handout in appendix C), so they must
be stealthy or skilled at deception.

MEETING WITH THE MAGISTER

The courthouse magister is Hester Barch (LG female
Turami human acolyte with Insight +4), a petite woman
in her seventies. Magister Barch is slow to anger and
fond of sharing lengthy educational anecdotes and para-
bles. Unknown to all but her closest aides, the magister
has the innate psionic ability to cast the detect thoughts
spell without somatic or material components. After
using it once, the magister must finish a short or long
rest before she can cast the spell again. Wisdom is her
spellcasting ability (spell save DC 12).

The magister is disinclined to agree to any request
for a private meeting with Fenerus, on the grounds that
he's a shady, unrepentant person and a flight risk. The
conditions under which she will permit a meeting are
as follows:

« A character who has at least 3 renown in the Harpers
or the Lords’ Alliance, or a character who belongs
to a Waterdavian noble family, makes a good argu-
ment and succeeds on a DC 15 Charisma (Persua-
sion} check.

« A character who is impersonating a noble or an official
makes a good argument and succeeds ona DC 15
Charisma (Deception) check. If the check fails, Magis-
ter Barch sees through the ruse and uses her detect
thoughts spell to verify that the character is in fact dis-
guised as a noble or an official--a crime that carries a
punishment of flogging followed by imprisonment for
up to a tenday, plus a fine of up to 500 gp.

+ A character tells the magister about the hidden cache
of dragons and Fenerus's role in finding it.

TALKING TO FENERUS

Fenerus Stormcastle (N male Tethyrian bandit captain)
is confined to a cell in area H8, waiting to stand trial.
He is charged with multiple counts of theft (highway
banditry) and assaults against Waterdavian citizens,
Fenerus knew it was only a matter of time until some-
one tipped off the City Watch; he suspects that another
member of the Blood Hawk Posse gave him up. The
timing is unfortunate for him, since he was planning to
earn a small fortune by turning over the Stone of Go-
lorr to his Luskanite contact. Now, he plans to use the
stone to escape imprisonment and wipe his criminal
record clean.

If the characters can get close enough to speak with
him, Fenerus refuses to divulge the stone's location until
he is released and granted immunity for his past crimes.
He knows that the presiding magister or a Lord of Wa-
terdeep has the authority to give him what he wants.

The only condition under which Magister Barch will
consider acquiescing to Fenerus’'s demands is if the
characters convince her that such a decision is good
for Waterdeep. To accomplish that, they either must

use magic to beguile her (which is a crime and likely to
result in the caster’s arrest once the effect wears off),

or they must tell her about the Vault of Dragons and the
stolen gold. In either case, she insists on trying some-
thing before letting him off the hook: after taking a short
rest, she has Fenerus brought to her courtroom and
questions him about the stone. Surreptitiously, she uses
her detect thoughts spell to scan his surface thoughts in
an attempt to discern the stone’s location. Given that the
stone is foremost in Fenerus's mind, Magistrate Barch
learns where it is hidden, shares the information with
the characters, and returns Fenerus to his cell.

WHERE'S THE STONE?

Fenerus hid the Stone of Galorr on the top floor of an
old tower in the Dock Ward—a tower warded against all
forms of magic. If he is freed, he offers to lead the char-
acters to the tower or provides directions so they can
find it on his own.

NEXT ENCOUNTER
If the characters learn where Fenerus hid the stone and
go after it, proceed with encounter 7, “Old Tower."

ENCOUNTER 9:
CELLAR COMPLEX

Cellars and sewer tunnels intersect to create small
dungeons under Waterdeep. These complexes have the
following features:

» Ceilings and doorways are 7 feet high.
» There are no light sources.

AREAS OF THE CELLAR COMPLEX

The following locations are keyed to map 4.7. The
complex has three distinct sections: the sewer tunnels
(areas B1-B3), the southern cellars (areas B4-B9), and
the northern cellars (areas B10-B11).

Bl. SEWER ACCESS

This chamber has stone steps and a locked, iron-baund
wooden door with a sign mounted on it that reads, in
Common, “SEWER ACCESS: AUTHORIZED CITY OFFI-
CIALS ONLY.” The door to area B2 is locked. The lock
can be picked by a character who makes a successful
DC 17 Dexterity check using thieves’ tools, or the door
can be forced open with a successiul DC 20 Strength
(Athletics) check. City Watch captains hold keys to
sewer access points that correspond with their as-
signed wards.

B2. SEWERS
Fresh sewage flows along a trough that runs parallel to
a stone walkway. The sewage is 3 feet deep. Any crea-
ture immersed in it for 1 minute must succeed on a DC
11 Constitution saving throw or become infected with
sewer plague (see “Diseases” in chapter 8 of the Dun-
geon Master’s Guide),

Where the tunnel branches, a stone bridge spans
the sewage pouring out of an eastern artery. There's

no walkway in this arterial passage that leads to areas
B3 and BA4.

CHAPTER 4 | DRAGON SEASON

»

4



@@@ 5 @@@



ﬁ‘

o,

AN /f \—/)"':

-
.dfgﬂll

41 T

INSTN2

A A=

Mar 4.7: CeELLar ComMPLEX

B3. SECRET DOORS

Secret doors blend with the surrounding stonework on
opposite sides of this sewer tunnel. One door opens into
area BY7, the other into area B10. Characters who have

a passive Perception score of 15 or higher spot both
secret doors as they pass by. Otherwise, finding a secret
door requires a search of the wall and a successful DC
15 Wisdom (Perception) check. The secret doors are set
high enough that opening them doesn't cause sewage to
flow into adjoining areas.

B4. RusTy [rRON DoOOR

A door made of rusted iron is set into the wall above a
dry, 1-foot-wide stone ledge. The door’s lock corroded
long ago, and the door squeals loudly on rusty hinges
when opened.

B5. ARROW SLITS

A brick wall with arrow slits was added to this room at
some point. The arrow slits are designed to allow ar-
chers to fire at intruders who come through the door at
area B4, The arrow slits provide three-quarters cover.

B6. STORAGE ROOM
. An unlocked wooden door closes off this empty room.

B7. RuBBLE-FILLED CELLAR

A wall has collapsed, creating a larger space out of two

smaller rooms. The air is heavy with dust, and the floor

is strewn with rubble, refuse, and rat droppings.
Secret Door. The secret door to area B3 is easily

spotted from this side (no check required).

CHAPTER & | DRAGON SEASON

\m S

—

?mmﬁm\ﬁ‘# 2
£

ﬁ"ﬁ\u 'Wu}ﬁ\h /) \,

\ Ty Jiq}

B8. SUNKEN CELLAR
This sunken cellar has these features:

 An unlocked iron door is set into the east wall.

« A crumbling stone staircase against the south wall
climbs up to a landing, where a wooden door is held
shut with a chain and a padlock.

Iron Door. The door opens into a small, empty stor-
age room with hooks hanging irom the ceiling.

Stairs Up. The lock can be picked with a successful
DC 15 Dexterity check made using thieves' tools, or
the door can be forced open with a successful DC 20
Strength (Athletics) check. It opens into an alley behind
a boarded-up tenement.

B9. RAT-INFESTED CELLAR

These rooms are situated below a hostel (75 percent
chance) or an orphanage (25 percent chance). Harmless
rats crawl about, minding their own business.

B9a. Stone stairs climb 10 feet to a wooden door that
opens into a street or alley. Crates and barrels stacked at
the bottom of the stairs hold edible foodstuffs, but noth-
ing else of value.

B9b. A plain wooden doar opens into a room contain-
ing dusty furnishings in storage. The furniture includes
a scratched wooden desk, several wobbly chairs, a coat
rack, two small tables, and an empty wooden trunk.
There's a 25 percent chance that one piece of furniture
(determined randomly) is a mimic that usually feeds on
rats but never passes up a bigger meal.



@@@ 6 @@@



B10. OLD TAVERN CELLAR
This spacious, empty cellar has the following features:

« Stone pillars and arches support the ceiling.
« Mismatched stonework on either side of a half-demol-

ished wall indicates that this area was once two sepa-
rate chambers.

. Stone stairs climb to a bricked-up doorway. (The door
once led to an alley behind an old tavern,)

Secret Door. The secret door to area B3 is easily
spotted from this side (no check required).

Bll. BACK CELLARS
These rooms are extensions of area B10.

B11a. This room used to be a wine cellar. Its walls are
lined with piles of rotting wood (storage racks) and bro-
ken bottles,

B1i1b. Once a cold storage room and root cellar, this
empty chamber is choked with dust and cobwebs.

CELLAR COMPLEX: SPRING

The characters have learned that a halfling necroman-
cer named Losser Mirklav took the Stone of Golorr. He
lives in a cellar complex under a powdered wig shop

in the Trades Ward. The shop, Dandymops, is closed
and locked with an iron gate. The lock can be picked by
a character who makes a successful DC 15 Dexterity
check using thieves' tools, or the gate can be forced
open with a successful DC 25 Strength (Athletics)
check. Since the shop is in a highly visible location, an
attempt to break into it is 75 percent likely to be noticed
by someone who alerts the City Watch. Two veterans of
the City Watch arrive in 1d10 minutes to investigate the
shop and talk to witnesses.

Xanathar's gazer (see appendix B) doesn't follow
characters into the shop. It remains outside and waits
for Xanathar Guild forces to arrive. If the characters
destroyed the gazer in an earlier encounter, another one
arrives with the Xanathar Guild forces.

DUNGEON ENTRANCE
Area Bl is the basement of the wig shop and the charac-
ters’ point of entry into the cellar complex.

MISTY SEWERS
The dense fog from outside settles in the sewers, and
areas B2, B3, and B4 are lightly obscured.

NECROMANCER
Losser Mirklav is a lightfoot halfling mage, with
these changes:

+ He is chaotic evil and has 31 (9d6) hit points.

« He has these racial traits: He is Small, and his walk-
ing speed is 25 feet. He can move through the space
of a Medium or larger creature. He has advantage on
saving throws against being frightened. He speaks
Common and Halfling.

« He has the animate dead and blight spells prepared,
instead of counterspell and greater invisibility. All his
spell slots are currently expended.

Losser carries a spellbook bound in stitched flesh that
contains all his prepared spells. He also has a key to

the padlocked door in area B8 and 4d10 gp in a pouch
made of elf skin and cinched with a rope made of woven
dwarf hair.

Losser has made several changes to the complex:

. Area B6 contains three beds—two sized for Losser’s
human apprentices and a smaller bed sized for him.

« Area B10 contains twelve skeletons that attack any-
one other than Losser and his apprentices.

« Area Bll contains piles of human bones stolen from
the City of the Dead. Losser hasn't gotten around to
animating them yet.

WHERE'S THE STONE?

Before the characters reach Losser, kenku members of
the Xanathar Guild break down the door leading into
the cellar complex via area B8 and confront the necro-
mancer. The characters find Losser cowering in one
corner of area B7, Two skeletons stand between him
and three kenku. The kenku aim to kill the halfling.
Lying on the floor around them are four dead kenku and
the remains of two destroyed (and previously animated)
skeletons.

If the characters demand the Stone of Golorr, Losser
tells them the truth: he surrendered it to the kenku, two
of which fled south with it. In area B8, the characters
see one kenku standing over the bodies of Losser’s
murdered human apprentices, Retchyn and Kreela. This
kenku is joined by Xanathar's gazer (see appendix B).
The kenku and the gazer try to hold off the characters
for as long as possible, buying time for a second kenku
to flee with the Stone of Gaolorr.

If the characters pursue the stone and leave Losser
alive, he eventually slips away and retreats to area Bl1,

NEXT ENCOUNTER
Once the characters defeat Xanathar's forces in the cel-
lar, they can chase after the fleeing kenku that has the

Stone of Golorr in its clutches, Proceed with encounter
3. “Street Chase.”

CELLAR COMPLEX: SUMMER

The characters are hot on the trail of three street ur-

chins as the children scamper into the sewers under the
Dock Ward.

SICKENING SMELL

The summer heat makes the sewer smell worse than
usual, and characters become poisoned by the stench
unless they cover their noses with perfumed scarves. :
The effect lasts until they leave the sewers. The street %
urchins and other creatures that live in the sewers are
accustomed to the smell and aren't poisoned in this way.,

SEARCH FOR THE URCHINS

The characters approach the cellar complex from the
east, eventually coming upon an iron door in the side of
the sewer tunnel (area B4).

The street urchins took the Stone of Golorr to area
B7 (which serves as their clubhouse), entering the room
through a secret door (area B3), The eldest child, Nat,
attuned to the stone, but contact with the aboleth so ter-
rified her that she dropped it, screamed, and ran away.

%

CHAPTER 4 | DRAGON SEASON 8



@@@ 7 @@@



The boys were panicked by her reaction and fled as well,
leaving the stone in area B7. If the characters open the
door at area B4, they startle the children on the other
side, causing them to scream at the top of their lungs.

Communicating through the other children, Nat tells
the characters where she dropped the stone and warns
them that it's “alive.” Neither she nor the boys are eager
to see 1t again.

CHAIR TopAYy, GONE TOMORROW

If the characters head to area B7, they see the Stone of
Golorr underneath a wooden rocking chair, If the street
urchins are present, one of them asks, “Where'd that
rocking chair come from?”

The rocking chair is the mimic from area B9b. It
heard the urchins’ screams and investigated, hoping to
snare an easy meal. It attacks anyone who harms it or
reaches for the stone.

NEXT ENCOUNTER

Once the characters obtain the Stone of Golorr, they
can leave the cellar complex. Proceed with encounter 8,
“Courthouse.”

CELLAR COMPLEX: AUTUMN

The characters have been encouraged to explore a
Xanathar Guild hideout under the Southern Ward. They
enter the location through area Bl, The Xanathar Guild
Roster table provides a summary of the forces stationed
throughout the complex. The sections that follow de-
scribe some of the hideout's features.

XANATHAR GuILD ROSTER

Area Creature(s)
BS 2 goblins behind arrow slits
B6 1 half-ogre that became poiscned after drinking six

casks of cheap wine

B7 3 duergar and 1 gazer (see appendix B) standing
guard while Thorvin Twinbeard (see appendix B)
works on a mechanical beholder (see “Mechanical
Beholder” below)

B8 Korgstrod Uxgulm, the duergar leader (40 hit
points), seated in a stone chair and attended by 3
kobolds (see “Stone of Deception” below)

B10 7 troglodytes lurking in the shadows

Bla 1 gibbering mouther guarding a treasure chest in
area B11b (see “Treasure Chest" below)

MECHANICAL BEHOLDER

A mechanical beholder built for the Day of Wonders
parade lies on its side in area B7. Xanathar wants this
mechanical version of itself to hover over the crowd,

., .reminding the Lords of Waterdeep of the beholder’s

' superiority, but no one can figure out how to make it

fly. A character can use an action to try to activate the

" machine, doing so with a successful DC 10 Intelligence

check. The activated beholder shoots dazzling lights

from its eyestalks for 1 minute and then stops working.
If combat breaks out in the cellar complex, Thorvin

- Twinbeard flees up the stairs in area B8 and uses a key

CHAFPTER 4 | DRAGON SEASON

to unlock the door leading outside. He has no loyalty to
the other creatures stationed here.

STONE OF DECEPTION

Korgstrod Uxgulm, the duergar leader, has what he
believes to be the Stone of Golorr. He found it during

a search of Fenerus's house in the Trades Ward. This
stone is a clever imitation. It's gray and ovoid with
streaks of black, but has no magical powers. Korgstrod
has been unable to attune to it and assumes he's unwor-
thy of it, not that the stone is fake,

Korgstrod plans to deliver the stone to Xanathar in
due time and won't willingly part with it before then. He
uses a whip to flog his kobold lackeys and keep them in
line. The cowardly kobolds flee into the sewers if Korg-
strod is attacked and cower in his presence otherwise.

TREASURE CHEST

An old, locked chest in the back of area B11b can be
opened by someone who makes a successful DC 13
Dexterity check using thieves’ tools. The chest contains
277 cp, 135 sp, a spherical gold beholder pendant with
tiny gems for eyes (worth 250 gp), and a spell scroll of
darkvision.

NEXT ENCOUNTER

Whether they find the fake stone or not, characters have
little recourse but to consult with “Laeral” at the Seven
Masks Theater in the Dock Ward. If they go there, pro-
ceed with encounter 6, “Theater.”

ENCOUNTER 10:
CONVERTED WINDMILL

This crumbling, two-story stone building was a wind-
mill long before the city rose up around it. The following
features apply unless an area description or encounter
states otherwise:

+ Rooms have 15-foot-high ceilings, with 10-foot-high
passages and 7-foot-high doorways connecting them.

+ Doors are wooden, closed, and unlocked.

+ The walls are covered with graffiti, and the stone
floors are strewn with garbage and detritus. Windows
are empty lead frames without glass.

+ There are no light sources.

AREAS OF THE
CONVERTED WINDMILL

The following locations are keyed to map 4.8.

WI1. STONE STAIRCASE

A curved set of stone stairs climbs 20 feet to the upper
level. The stairs are covered with bird droppings, broken
roof shingles, mud, and mold.

W2. SQUATTERS

During the spring, summer, and winter, each of these
rooms i1s home to 1d6 + 1 squatters (commoners) who
have made dens for themselves out of old furnishings
and things salvaged from garbage piles. The squatters
aren't looking for trouble.



@@@ 8 @@@



i

ﬁ‘f\;\"‘nﬂ‘-ﬁ* »

]
T S

;_gf ONI[= mfé«wzs—-m%

Ground Floor

Mar 4 8: CONVERTED WINDMILL

For some food or coin, a squatter can direct or lead
characters to the locked apartment on the upper level
(area W7} and describe the apartment’s inhabitants. A
character can also secure a squatter’s cooperation with
a successful DC 10 Charisma (Intimidation) check,

W3. Privy

Beyond the door is nothing more than a hole in the floor
from which rises a terrible stench.

W4. WEAK CEILING/FLOOR
Area W4a is directly underneath area W4b. The floor
of the upper chamber collapses under the weight of the

hrst Small or larger creature to walk across it. A charac-

ter who has the Stonecunning trait or proficiency with
mason’s tools can tell that the floor is unsafe to walk on.

Any creature standing on the floor of area W4b when
it collapses falls 20 feet, landing in area W4a. Any crea-
ture in area W4a when the ceiling falls in must make a
DC 11 Dexterity saving throw, taking 4 (1d8) bludgeon-
ing damage from falling debris on a failed save, or half
as much damage on a successful one.

W5. ANCIENT MILLSTONE

An ancient millstone lies under a jumble of debris that
includes machinery and pieces of the collapsed roof.
Dust and cobwebs cover everything.

W6. Pi1IGEON RooOSsTS

Large sections of the roof have caved in above these
rooms, leaving holes through which birds and precipita-

2 Upper Floor

1 square = 5 feet

tion can enter. The floors are littered with broken shin-

gles, bird droppings, wrecked furnishings, and other de-
tritus, and scores of pigeons roost in the moldy rafters.

W7. SECURE APARTMENT
The north door to this room has been fitted with a shiny
new lock that can be picked with a successful DC 15
Dexterity check using thieves' tools. The door can also
be unlocked from inside the room, or forced open with a
successful DC 20 Strength (Athletics) check.

This apartment is in good repair and contains the fol-
lowing features:

« A wood-framed, king-sized bed with clean mattresses
stands against one wall. (Next to the bed, an unlocked
door in the west wall leads to area W8.)

» The window was recently repaired and quietly swings
open on oiled iron hinges.

« Across from the window, against the wall, stands a
wooden armoire.

The armoire holds four clean sets of clothes, two gray

cloaks, a heavy crossbow, and a wooden case containing

twenty crossbow bolts.

W8. BAck Room

The section of conical roof directly above this cham-
ber has mostly collapsed, filling the room with rubble.
There's just enough space to open the door.

CHAFIER & |

DRAGON SEASON



@@@ 9 @@@



CONVERTED WINDMILL: SPRING

The key that the characters found in the mausoleum
leads them to an old windmill in the Southern Ward.
Volkarr Kibbens and Urlaster Ghann (NE male Illuskan
human commeoners) are hiding out in a secure apart-
ment on the upper floor (area W7). In combat, they wield
shovels that deal damage as clubs. Each carries 3d6 gp
in a pouch,

Volkarr and Urlaster were recently hired by Losser
Mirklav, a halfling necromancer, to help him break into
mausoleums in the City of the Dead. They undertook the
job because the pay was good, but they have no loyalty
to the necromancer. If the characters confront them,
Volkarr and Urlaster attack, but they surrender quickly
if overwhelmed and share the following information in
exchange for their lives and freedom:

« Losser Mirklav and his two human apprentices,
Retchyn and Kreela, live in a cellar complex under
the Trades Ward. The way to their lair is through
Retchyn's powdered wig shop, which is called
Dandymops.

» Losser is stealing bones from the City of the Dead to
create an army of animated skeletons. (Neither Vol-
karr nor Urlaster knows why.)

+ In the Garloth mausoleum, Losser killed a rat and
took the small stone it was carrying, The rat vanished
when it died, and Losser thinks the stone is magical.

NEXT ENCOUNTER
Once the characters set out to find the halfling necro-
mancer, proceed with encounter 9, “Cellar Complex.”

CONVERTED WINDMILL: SUMMER

The characters head to a decrepit building in the South-
ern Ward that used to be a windmill. Therein, they
expect to find the Stone of Golorr in the clutches of two
treacherous cult fanatics named Arn Xalrondar (LE
male Tethyrian human) and Seffia Naelryke (LE female
Tethyrian human).

CuLrt FANATICS
Arn and Seffia are waiting in area W7, which they use
as an apartment. They keep the door to the apartment
locked at all times. They have cleared area W8 of debris
and painted a pentagram in blood on the floor. At the
points of the pentagram are five black globs of wax—the
remains of burned candles.

Lord Cassalanter sent Arn and Seffia on a mission
to retrieve the Stone of Golorr from his family’s mau-
soleum. He also gave them secret orders to dispose of
three other members of the cult whom he couldn't trust
to keep quiet about the stone. Arn and Seffia would
be horrified to learn that they failed in so simple a
task; they try to correct their mistake by killing Vaelle
Lurval if she’s with the party (see “Mausoleum: Sum-
mer, page 70).

DEVILS' ARRIVAL

As characters try to break into the cult fanatics' apart-
ment, three spined devils arrive. The devils fly to the
tower, knock on the apartment window, and are let

K |
1-E-j e il =

inside by Seffia, whereupon Arn gives one of them the
Stone of Golorr. When the characters enter, they see the
devils fly off with the stone. The cult fanatics do every-
thing in their power to enable the devils to escape.

NEXT ENCOUNTER

If the characters deal with the cult fanatics, they can
chase after the fleeing spined devils by running across
rooftops. Proceed with encounter 5, “Rooftop Chase.”

CONVERTED WINDMILL: AUTUMN

This old stone windmill was converted into a residence
over a century ago and has fallen into disrepair. An
eccentric Waterdavian artist lives here, and she hasn't
been the same since her true love abandoned her. There
are no squatters in the residence.

The outside doors are always locked. A lock can be
picked with a successful DC 15 Dexterity check by a
character using thieves’ tools, or a door can be smashed
open with a successful DC 15 Strength (Athletics)
check. Any attempt to break into the tower is 735 percent
likely to be seen or heard by one of Kalain's neighbors.
Eight veterans of the City Watch arrive 10 minutes later
to investigate the intrusion.

LET ME PAINT YOU A PICTURE

Kalain, a famous Waterdavian painter, was commis-
sioned to paint a portrait of Lord Dagult Neverember,
then Waterdeep’s Open Lord, in 1475 DR. Her meeting
with Neverember marked the beginning of a torrid love
affair that lasted over a year. One of the many gifts he
lavished on her was an estate in the Sea Ward.

Their relationship faltered as Dagult's visits to Never-
winter became more frequent and extended. He made
promises to Kalain that he failed to keep, and when she
raised the subject of faithful commitment, he treated
her poorly, for his true love was Neverwinter. Kalain
became enraged after Dagult's rejection and turned to
painting monsters that, in her mind, represented him.
Her power to harness the Weave clings to the fabric of
her works, giving her the ability to bring these monsters
to life on command.

Ultimately, Neverember used his influence to ruin Ka-
lain and divorce her from Waterdeep’s high society. She
was allowed to keep her home, but her works and her
reputation were destroyed, slowly and methodically. Ka-
lain's spirit was broken, leading to the onset of madness.
Now she locks herself away, content to let time erode the
last of her conscience. She always saw Dagult and Wa-
terdeep as one and the same, and now they are both her
mortal enemies.

VISITING THE RESIDENCE

Kalain is unable to behave politely before strangers, for
she believes they're all assassins sent by Dagult Never-
ember to murder her, The only person with whom she's
civil is Vhaspar Holmdreg (LG male [lluskan human
priest), who rents a room in the west wing of the resi-
dence and works in the North Ward at the Hospice of St.
Laupsenn, a temple of [Imater, god of suffering. Vhaspar
is an old man in his seventies, half blind with cataracts,
who brings her food twice a week, firewood three times



@@@ 10 @@@



a week in the winter, and painting supplies every few
months. Vhaspar has a key that unlocks the outer doors
of Kalain's residence.

Displayed in every room except area W5 is one of Ka-
lain's paintings. To determine the subject of any given
painting, roll a d12 and consult the Painting Subjects
table. It's possible for a subject to appear more than
once. The residence is also crawling with rats. If Kalain
is attacked, these vermin form six swarms of rats that
defend her,

PAINTING SUBJECTS

d12  Subject d12  Subject

1 Ankheg 7  Gibbering mouther

2 Carrion crawler 8 Hell hound

3 Displacer beast 9 Manticore

4 Ettercap 10 Minotaur

5 Gargoyle 1 Mummy

6 Ghast 12 Werewolf
KALAIN

Kalain spends most of her time in area W5, which
serves as her studio. It contains moldy scraps of food,
empty pots stained with colored paint, discarded
brushes, and her easel, which is situated in front of a
large, lead-paned window in the north wall. Upon the
easel rests a fresh painting of a displacer beast. If the
characters confront her, Kalain accuses them of being
assassins, brings the displacer beast to life, and com-
mands it to attack them.

Kalain is a half-elf bard (see appendix B), with
these changes:

» She is chaotic evil.

« She has these racial traits: She has advantage on sav-
ing throws against being charmed, and magic can't
put her to sleep. She has darkvision out to a range of
60 feet. She speaks Common and Elvish.

. Instead of the Song of Rest trait, she has the Art Imi-
tates Life action option.

Art Imitates Life (3/Day). Kalain touches one of her paintings
and causes its subject to spring forth, becoming a creature of
that kind provided its CR is 3 or lower. The creature appears in
an unoccupied space within 5 feet of the painting, which be-
comes blank. The creature is friendly toward Kalain and hostile
toward all others. It rolls initiative to determine when it acts. It
disappears after 1 minute, when it is reduced to 0 hit points, or
when Kalain dies or falls unconscious.

PATH TO THE VAULT

A heavy stone trapdoor in the floor of area W4a can be
found with a thorough search of the room and a success-
ful DC 12 Wisdom (Perception) check. Pulling open the
door reveals a stone staircase that descends 120 feet to
a 20-foot-wide corridor, which extends for another 60
feet and ends before the doors to the Vault of Dragons,
Kalain and Vhaspar know nothing of the vault or the
trapdoor that leads to it.

CONVERTED WINDMILL: WINTER

An evil dragonborn named Thrakkus has converted

an old, fire-scorched windmill in the Field Ward into

a butcher's shop. A member of the Guild of Butchers,
Thrakkus has a lucrative side business. Zhents loyal to
Manshoon pay Thrakkus to chop up people they kill,
and he sells the meat on the sly. As Deadwinter Day ap-
proaches, this meat is in high demand. The corpses are
brought to him in the dead of night, most often delivered
by Sidra Romeir (see chapter 8, area K2) in a covered
cart pulled by a draft horse,

BUTCHERY
A red wooden sign carved to look like a butcher’s cleaver
hangs above the door of Thrakkus's butchery, which
occupies the westernmost room of the west wing. The
butchery is ice cold in the winter and reeks of meat and
blood. A bloodstained chopping block dominates the
room, and shelves of cut meat wrapped in bloody parch-
ment line the walls. The floor is streaked with blood and
covered with bits of gore.

Thrakkus padlocks the door at night. Picking the
lock requires a successful DC 15 Dexterity check using
thieves’ tools. The door can also be forced open with a
successful DC 18 Strength (Athletics) check.

[LARDER

The chamber next to the butchery has been converted
into a larder, the doors to which are padlocked at all
hours. The locked doors are otherwise identical to the
butchery door (see above). Like the butchery, the larder
is frigid in the winter and smells of meat and blood. Six
half-frozen humanoid carcasses are stacked under a
10-foot-square canvas tarpaulin near the western wall.
Thrakkus hasn't gotten around to cutting them up yet.

SQUATTERS

The dragonborn allows squatters to dwell in his home.
Those who can perform menial chores are spared and
fed scraps of cooked meat; the rest end up on the chop-
ping block. These homeless sods are too frightened of
Thrakkus to speak ill of him, and the City Watch doesn't
seem to care about crimes committed in the Field Ward.

THRAKKUS THE BUTCHER
The butcher has no time to suffer fools, and the charac-
ters are fools for meddling in his business. Thrakkus
spends most of the day in the butchery. At dusk, he re-
tires to his apartment, where he stays until dawn or un-
til someone comes knocking with a body to dispose of.
Thrakkus carries keys to the butchery, the larder, and
his apartment (area W7).

Thrakkus is a dragonborn berserker of red dragon
ancestry, with these changes:

- He is chaotic evil.

« He has these racial traits: He can use his action to
exhale a 15-foot cone of fire (but can't do this again
until he finishes a short or long rest); each creature in
the cone must make a DC 13 Dexterity saving throw,
taking 2d6 fire damage on a failed save, or half as
much damage on a successful one. He has resistance
to fire damage. He speaks Common and Draconic.

CHAFTER 4 | DRAGON SEASON.



@@@ 11 @@@



WHERE'S THE STONE?
Thrakkus hid the Stone of Golorr in a recent meat de-
livery to an alley in the Trades Ward. Thrakkus doesn't
keep records of his illegal transactions, so the charac-
ters must interrogate him or one of the commoners that
dwell in his residence.

Thrakkus is belligerent and not eager to give up his
Zhent friends. A charm person spell or similar magic
is needed to compel him to talk. His squatters are an-
other matter; they roll over on Thrakkus quickly to save
their own skins once the dragonborn butcher no longer
becomes a factor in their well-being. Either approach
yields the following information:

+ Thrakkus's last shipment of meat was taken to a shop
in the Trades Ward called Cuttle’'s Meat Pies. It's lo-
cated in an alley.

» The meat was delivered by a member of the Guild of
Butchers named Justyn Rassk. Thrakkus paid extra
coin to see it delivered “quickly and quietly.”

« Rassk has a blood-spattered horse-drawn cart that he
uses to make deliveries outside the Field Ward.

The characters might know Justyn Rassk from their
own dealings with the Guild of Butchers (see “Sample
Guild Representatives,” page 41).

NEXT ENCOUNTER
If the characters follow the trail of the meat delivery,
proceed with encounter 1, “Alley.”

VAULT KEYS

At the end of an encounter chain, a character who is
attuned to the Stone of Golorr can learn the location of
the Vault of Dragons and what three keys are needed
to open its doors. The artifact also reveals that an adult
gold dragon named Aurinax guards the vault.

The three keys needed to open the vault are chosen by
you or determined randomly by rolling on the Vault Keys
table. Illusory versions of keys don’t open the door.

Every key can be found or procured in Waterdeep. If
the characters don't already know the location of a key,
they can gather information about it. To do this, a char-
acter must spend 1 day and 5 gp researching the loca-
tion of a key. At the end of this day, the character makes
a DC 15 Intelligence (Investigation) check, learning the
location of the key on a success. If the check fails by 5
or more, the main villain learns of the search and sends
lackeys to attack the characters and, if possible, wrest
the Stone of Golorr from them:

CHAPTER 4 | DRAGON SEASON

« Xanathar sends either five goblins dressed up as
children wearing Trolltide masks and a bugbear (70
percent chance), or four wererats in human form (30
percent chance).

« The Cassalanters send two imps in raven form, three
human cultists, and either a human cult fanatic
(70 percent chance), or four spined devils (30 per-
cent chance).

+ Jarlaxle Baenre sends Fel'rekt Lafeen and Krebbyg
Masq'il'yr, or two other Bregan D'aerthe drow gun-
slingers (see appendix B), and six drow.

+ Manshoon sends four Zhent martial arts adepts (see
appendix B). There's a 50 percent chance that these
Zhents are led by one of Manshoon's lieutenants, ei-
ther Vevette Blackwater or Agorn Fuoco, if they're still
alive (see chapter 8, area ES8).

KEY DESCRIPTIONS

The keys listed in the Vault Keys table are further de-
scribed below, in alphabetical order.

ADAMANTINE BAR

The characters can purchase a 10-pound adamantine
bar for 1,000 gp. The genasi smiths Embric and Avi (see
chapter 2, area T3) can acquire one if the characters
think to ask them.

ANIMATED CONSTRUCT
Any creature of the construct type works as this key,
provided the creature hasn't been destroyed or rendered
inoperable. If the characters have befriended Valetta,
the dragonborn priest of Gond (see chapter 3), she hap-
pily releases Nim the nimblewright into their custody
until they no longer have need of it.

An object animated by the animate objects spell also
qualifies as this key.

BEARDLESS DWARF

Most female dwarves are beardless and thus meet the
condition. A male dwarf NPC can be persuaded to shave
his beard, either as a consequence of losing a bet or
upon receiving some sort of recompense. The charac-
ters can also shave a male dwarf they have captured or
against whom they have some sort of leverage.

BEHOLDER EYESTALK

The eyestalk need not come from a true, living beholder.
[t can be plucked from a stuffed beholder (see “Old Xob-
lob Shop,” page 23) or obtained from a lesser form of
beholderkin, such as a gazer or a spectator. The eyestalk
also need not be detached.

VAuLT KEYS (ROLL THREE TIMES, ONCE FOR EACH KEY)

dé First Key Second Key Third Key

] Adamantine bar Animated construct Beardless dwarf

2 Beholder eyestalk Bronze dragon scale Cask of dwarven ale
3 Drunken elf Gems worth at least 1,000 gp Gift from a queen

2 Invisible creature Painting of a dwarf miner Pair of bugbear ears
5 Performance of “Your Beardy Face” Severed drow hand Shapechanger

6 Silvered warhammer Sunlight Unicorn



@@@ 12 @@@



Xanathar (see appendix B) gladly accompanies char-
acters to the vault if that's the way to guarantee getting
its share of the treasure. Regardless of the arrangement
it makes with the characters, "its share” equates to all
the treasure. In other words, Xanathar turns on the
party once the vault is unlocked, unless a powerful NPC
(such as Laeral Silverhand or Vajra Safahr) is present to
keep the mad beholder in check.

BRONZE DRAGON SCALE

Zelifarn, a young bronze dragon, has taken up res-
idence in Deepwater Harbor. Many sailors and dock
workers have seen the dragon, and Grinda Garloth (see
“Encounter 2: Mistshore,” page 65) owns an appa-
ratus of Kwalish that characters can use to search for
the dragon. Characters who go looking for Zelifarn find
him lurking inside a shipwreck 120 feet underwater.
As the characters approach the wreck, Zelifarn comes
out and tries to scare them away. (He's not done search-
ing the wreck for treasure.) He inflicts harm only in
self-defense.

A successful DC 15 Charisma (Persuasion) check or
an offer of treasure worth at least 1,000 gp convinces
the dragon to talk with the characters and part with
one of his scales. If the characters mention the contents
of the Vault of Dragons, Zelifarn demands a promise
of 10 percent of the gold before he gives them what
they came for.

CASK OF DWARVEN ALE

A cask of dwarven ale is easily obtained at any market
in Waterdeep for 5 gp. There is a 20 percent chance that
the characters buy a knock-off brand that isn't made by
dwarves. Any dwarf character can tell genuine dwarven
ale from the fake stuff simply by having a taste.

DRUNKEN ELF
Any elf who is poisoned from drinking alcohol qualifies
as this key.

GeEMS WOrTH AT LEAST 1,000 P

One or more gemstones qualify as this key as long as
their combined value is 1,000 gp or more. Such gems
can be found during the adventure or bought in the mar-
kets of Waterdeep.

GIFT FROM A QUEEN

LLaeral Silverhand, the Open Lord of Waterdeep, was
once the queen of an ancient kingdom called Stornanter.
The characters can recall this fact with a successful DC
20 Intelligence (History) check or learn it through infor-
mation gathering. They can request an audience with
Laeral through Jalester Silvermane or Mirt. Laeral gives
them a gift—a feather quill given to her by the archmage
Elminster himself—if they promise to return the stolen
gold to Waterdeep's cofters.

INVISIBLE CREATURE
Any creature under the effect of an invisibility spell
counts as this key, as do naturally invisible creatures.

ER 4 DRAGON SEASON



@@@ 13 @@@







@@@ 14 @@@



L4

L S =



@@@ 15 @@@



PAINTING OF A DWARF MINER

A painting of a dwarf miner priced at 5d10 gp can be
found each day a character spends searching art shops.
A character proficient with painter’'s supplies can create
a painting that qualifies as this key. It takes 3d6 hours to
finish the painting.

PAIR OF BUGBEAR EARS

The Xanathar Guild employs bugbears, and characters
can chop the ears off any of them. A live bugbear also
counts as this key.

PERFORMANCE OF “YOUR BEARDY FACE”

The dwarf love song, “Your Beardy Face,” is a duet per-
formed by bagpipers. The characters can obtain this
music easily for 1 gp and hire two performers to play the
piece for 10 gp each. A character who has proficiency
with bagpipes can perform the song, though a success-
ful DC 10 Charisma (Performance) check using bag-
pipes is required for the performance to count as this
key. A glass jar in Cassalanter Villa (see chapter 6, area
C3) plays this song when it is uncorked.

SEVERED DrOwW HAND

This ghastly key can be forcibly obtained from a mem-
ber of Bregan D'aerthe or some other dark elf. If the
characters have encountered no drow, they might hear
rumors that Xanathar employs a drow advisor.

SHAPECHANGER

Any living creature of the shapechanger subtype, such
as a doppelganger or a wererat, serves as this key. Bon-
nie the doppelganger (see “Familiar Faces,” page 20)
can be persuaded to accompany the characters if she

is friendly toward one or more of them. The characters
can also reach out to the Shard Shunners, a local gang
of halfling wererats. For an up-front payment of 500 gp,
the wererats happily oblige.

SILVERED WARHAMMER

The characters can buy a silvered warhammer for 115
gp, or they can give a silver bar to Embric and Avi (see
chapter 2, area T3) and have the genasi smiths craft one.

SUNLICHT

Since the vault lies deep underground, natural sunlight
is difficult to come by. Clever characters can buy twenty
steel mirrors (5 gp each) and arrange them in places
(and at the proper angles) so that sunlight from outside
can be reflected underground and shone upon the vault
entrance. Setting up these mirrors and getting their
alignment just right takes 2d4 + 2 hours regardless of
the number of characters involved.

UNICORN

Although conjuring up a real unicorn is likely beyond

~ the abilities of the characters, they could ask Laeral

Silverhand or Vajra Safahr to cast the summon celes-

tial spell. The characters can gain an audience with

Laeral or Vajra through Renaer Neverember or another

well-connected NPC. If the characters tell Laeral or

Vajra the truth about the Vault of Dragons and prom-
ise to turn the gold over to the authorities, either one

CHAPTER 4 | DRAGON SEASON

agrees to accompany the characters to the vault and cast
the spell.

The unicorn need not be a real unicorn to serve as
this key. The Sea Maidens Faire (see chapter 7) uses a
unicorn float in its parades, and a stuffed unicorn can be
found in Cassalanter Villa (see chapter 6, area T18),

VAULT OF DRAGONS

Once the characters have the Stone of Golorr, they can
use it to determine the location of the Vault of Dragons
and the keys needed to enter it.

VAULT FEATURES

All areas of the vault have the following features:

« Any spell that tries to contact a creature in the vault
fails, as does any spell that attempts to scry on the
vault interior or any creatures within. Teleporting into
the vault from outside is impossible.

« Walls are made of mortared stone. Doors are solid
stone slabs with stone handles and hinges.

« Exceptin area V9, there are no light sources.

AREAS OF THE VAULT

The following locations are keyved to map 4.9.

V1. VaurLt DoOOR

A 20-foot-high, 20-foot-wide stone corridor ends be-
fore an adamantine double door bearing Dwarvish
runes. The doors have neither handles nor hinges. The
writing on them reads, “THE THREE KEYS. BRING
THEM FORTH.”

The doors part, sliding back into the walls, when the
three correct keys are brought with 5 feet of them. They
remain open until Aurinax or someone else speaks the
command word to close them ("Azaam”). The keys can
open the doors from either side. The doors can't be
forced open or damaged in any way, and attempts to cir-
cumvent them with magic fail automatically.

V2. ENTRANCE FOYER
This vast chamber has the following features:

+ Three age-worn columns support crumbling stone
bridges 60 feet overhead, with the ceiling rising an-
other 20 feet beyond that.

+ Set into alcoves are twelve sets of double doors
made of iron. Each door is 10 feet wide, 10 feet high,
and embossed with images of dwarf warriors in
plate armor-.

Crumbling Bridges. The bridges connect area V4 to
adamantine doors that seal off areas V6, V7, and V8.
The eastern half of the northern bridge and the western
half of the southern bridge are unstable. Either bridge
collapses if more than 150 pounds of weight is applied
to it. A creature standing on a section of bridge when
it collapses must succeed on a DC 15 Dexterity saving
throw or fall 60 feet to the Hoor below.

The middle bridge has a 15-foot-wide gap in it. A char-
acter can clear this gap with a running jump—but part
of the bridge breaks away under the character’s feet on



@@@ 16 @@@



1 square = 10 feet

Mar 4.9: VauLt oF DraGONS

landing, forcing the character to succeed on a DC 15
Dexterity saving throw or fall to the floor below.

Iron Doors. Ten of the double doors are false and re-
fuse to budge. The two sets of doors at the northern end
of the west wall push open to reveal area V3 beyond.

V3. Stairs AND FRESCO
This hall has the following features:

« At the south end of this chamber, expertly carved
stairs climb 70 feet to area V4.

« The north wall bears a 20-foot-square fresco that de-
picts dwarves battling goblins.

Enthralling Fresco, A detect magic spell reveals an
aura of enchantment magic on the fresca. Any creature
within 30 feet of the fresco that can see it must succeed
on a DC 12 Wisdom saving throw or be charmed by it
for 24 hours. While charmed in this way, the creattre
can't willingly move out of sight of the fresco and de-
fends it to the death. If forcibly moved away from the
fresco, the creature tries to find its way back. The crea-
ture can't rest while under this effect. After 24 hours,
the creature gains one level of exhaustion and can re-
peat the saving throw if it can still see the fresco, ending
the effect on a success. A creature that succeeds on the
saving throw is immune to the effect of the fresco for 24
hours. Destroying at least one 10-foot-square section of
the fresco ends the effect for all creatures. Each 10-foot-
square section has AC 17, 25 hit points, and immunity to
poison and psychic damage.

=
=
Ao Y

V4, HALL OF MORADIN
This 20-foot-high hall has the following features;:

» Three pillars running the length of the hall are carved
to resemble warhammers, with their square heads
pressed against the floor.

+ The west wall bears a cracked mosaic that depicts a
dwarf smith at a forge, crafting dwarves out of black
metal and diamonds. (In the south end of the wall is a
secret door.)

+ Three archways in the east wall lead to crumbling
bridges that span the entrance foyer (area V2) and
end in front of adamantine doors (leading to areas V6,
V7, and V8),

Black Pudding. A little more than halfway down
the hall, a section of the western mural has broken off,
forming a heap of shattered tile on the floor. A crack in
the wall conceals a black pudding that gushes out and
attacks characters who inspect the damage.

Secret Door. A character who searches the hall for k-
secret doors and succeeds on a DC 17 Wisdom (Percep- "
tion) check notices the outline of a secret door that leads % &

: %
ta area V5. The doar opens automatically when a dwarf =

(or a creature transformed into a dwarf with an alter self rj)
spell or similar magic) touches it; otherwise, a success- v

ful DC 17 Strength (Athletics) check is needed to push e
open the heavy door.

CHAFPTER 4 | DRAGON SEASON )



@@@ 17 @@@



V5. SECRET Room

This dust-filled room has lain untouched since the time
of the Delzoun dwarves. Green copper urns on plat-
forms overflow with coins, gems, and more.

Treasure. This room holds five copper urns (worth
25 gp each). Urn 1 contains five tourmalines (worth 100
gp each) mixed in with 200 cp. Urn 2 contains a ring of
warmth mixed in with ten ordinary gold rings (worth
25 gp each) and 650 sp. Urn 3 is piled high with 250
gp. Urn 4 holds 33 blue quartz gemstones (worth 10 gp
each). Urn 5 holds a 9-inch-tall silver statuette of a dwarf
priest of Moradin with amethyst eyes (worth 250 gp and
weighing 10 pounds).

V6. HAMMER AND ANVIL

The adamantine door to this room has an arcane lock
spell cast on it, but it swings open when a dwarf or a
creature transformed into a dwarf touches it. Another
creature can force it open with a successful DC 21
Strength (Athletics) check. A knock spell or similar
magic also opens it. The door swings into the room on
stiff adamantine hinges.

« The north, east, and south walls of this 20-foot-high
room are adorned with dust-covered frescoes depict-
ing dwarf smiths at work in their forges.

« Aniron anvil sits atop a raised stone block in the mid-
dle of the floor. Both fixtures are draped in cobwebs.

Frescoes. A character who inspects the wall frescoes
and succeeds on a DC 10 Wisdom (Perception) check
notices that the stone hammer being wielded by the
smith in the fresco on the south wall can be taken away
from where it rests. When removed, it leaves a ham-
mer-shaped indentation in the wall. Etched into the side
of the hammer that was facing the wall is the following
inscription in Dwarvish runes: “Let hearts be lifted and
battles won.” The hammer must be removed from its
indentation for the inscription to be seen.

Iron Anvil. If the characters clear away the cobwebs,
they see an inscription on the front of the stone block.
Written in Dwarvish runes, it reads as follows: “Let the
hammer fall and the anvil ring.”

If the anvil is struck by the stone hammer that was
taken from the wall, each creature in the room that can
hear the anvil ring gains 10 temporary hit points that
last for 24 hours, Once the anvil has bestowed this gift,
it can't do so again for 24 hours.

V7. DUMATHOIN'S SECRET

This room is sealed by an adamantine door similar
to the one in area V6. The room contains the follow-
ing features:

» Four suits of rusted plate armor sans helmets, sized
for a dwarf, stand in the corners of this 20-foot-high
room. Each suit is draped in cobwebs.

« Dwarvish runes are carved into the far wall. The in-
scription reads, “A secret never before told will part
Dumathoin’s lips.”

A successful DC 14 Intelligence (Religion) check iden-
tifies Dumathoin as the dwarven god of secrets. Any
dwarf character automatically knows this.

'CHAFTER 4 | DRAGON SEASON

Secret Stair. The engraving on the wall is a clue that
this room holds a secret, specifically a trapdoor so well
hidden that it can’t be found by using magic or search-
ing. But when any creature in the room speaks aloud a
secret, the trapdoor flips open, giving access to a spiral
stone staircase that descends 120 feet to area V9. The
spoken admission must be true, and it must be some-
thing the character has not previously revealed.

V8. OL' Fire EYEs

This room has the following features:

« A 10-foot-tall painted statue of an armored male dwarf
wielding a battleaxe and wearing a mask stands at the
back of this 20-foot-high room.

+ Before the statue, set into the floor, is an adamantine
trapdoor with a pull ring along one side.

Trap. A successful DC 17 Intelligence (Religion) check
enables a character to recognize the statue as a depic-
tion of Gorm Gulthyn, the dwarven god of vigilance also
known as Fire Eyes. The statue melds seamlessly with
the floor and can't be toppled. It also seems impervious
to damage. A detect magic spell reveals an aura of evo-
cation magic on the statue,

The trapdoor is false and can't be lifted. Anyone who
touches the trapdoor or its pull ring must succeed on
a DC 18 Dexterity saving throw or be struck by rays of
magical fire that spring from the statue's eyes, dealing
22 (4d10) fire damage. The trap doesn't trigger if the tar-
get has total cover.

V9. MAIN VAULT

When the characters arrive here for the first time, read:

L] [ J
Although deep underground, this vault is lit by streams
of sunlight that pour down from the ceiling, catching
motes of dust in their luminous pools. Ornate columns
support a thirty-foot-high vaulted ceiling, which is
adorned with carvings of dwarves basking in the pres-
ence of their gods. Deep alcoves line the walls, and piled
in one of them is a vast golden trove,

Out of the dusty gloom steps an aged dwarf clutching
a staff carved and painted to resemble a pair of entwined
dragons—aone red, one gold, Despite the dwarf’s age, his
eyes are steady and bright. “l wasn't expecting anyone,”
he says plainly. “As you can see, the place is a mess.
Perhaps you should come back later, after I've tidied
up a bit."

L] -

The dwarf, who calls himself Barok Clanghammer, is
really the adult gold dragon Aurinax (see appendix B)
in disguise. He guards the gold for Lord Dagult Nev-
erember and holds the dragonstaff of Ahghairon (see
appendix A) in exchange for his services. Dealing with
the gold dragon presents an unusual challenge for the
characters, and a peaceful resolution is more likely to
benefit them than a violent one.

Aurinax is patient, wise, merciful, and vigilant. He
remains in humanoid form until combat breaks out,



@@@ 18 @@@



since he can’t easily carry the dragonstaff of Ahghairon
in dragon form. The dragon attacks only in defense of
itself, the staff, or the gold. The only individuals autho-
rized to remove the gold under Aurinax’'s watch are
Dagult Neverember and his appointed vassals, none of
whom are currently in Waterdeep.

The characters can try to convince Aurinax that they
have come on Neverember's behalf. Since he has never
met them before or heard Neverember mention them
by name, Aurinax is doubtful of their story. Fooling the
dragon requires each character within his line of sight to
succeed on a Charisma (Deception) check contested by
the dragon’s Wisdom (Insight) check. If even one char-
acter loses the contest, Aurinax senses that the group is
lying to him. These checks are made with advantage if
Renaer Neverember is with the party, since the dragon
remembers meeting Renaer when he was but a child
and can easily imagine a scenario in which Dagult Nev-
erember might use his son as his vassal. (The dragon
knows nothing of the animosity between Renaer and
his father.)

The characters can try to convince the noble dragon
that Lord Neverember embezzled the gold from the
people of Waterdeep, and that it would be fair and just
to see the coin safely returned to its rightful owners.
Deep down, Aurinax knows where the gold came from,
but the dragon has allowed his greed and his agreement
with Lord Neverember to cloud his moral judgment.
With a successful DC 18 Charisma (Persuasion) check,
a character can talk the dragon into allowing the gold to
be returned to the people to whom it rightfully belongs.
The check is made with advantage if the characters
brought a prominent city official with them, such as Mirt
or Vajra Safahr, or if one of the characters professes to
be a worshiper of Bahamut.

Any Charisma (Intimidation) check made to influence
Aurinax automatically fails. After the first such attempt,
all future Charisma checks made by the party to influ-
ence Aurinax have disadvantage.

Aurinax uses Legendary Resistance to avoid being
charmed. If a character tries to charm him with a spell
and fails, all future Charisma checks made by the party
to influence Aurinax have disadvantage.

Treasure. Choose two alcoves in the vault, Piled in
one alcove are 500,000 gp, the combined weight of
which is 10,000 pounds. Scattered on the floor of the
second alcove are sixty-five 100 gp gemstones—all that
remains of Aurinax’s current food supply.

Aurinax won't give up his gemstones or the dragon-
staff of Ahghairon willingly, since they are his pavment
for guarding the gold. If need be, however, the dragon
is willing to use the staff's power on behalf of the city in
exchange for more gemstones.

LEAVING THE VAULT

As the characters leave the vault, with or without the
gold, they are confronted by a hostile force sent by the
main villain or villains. If the vault doors were left open,
the characters encounter these antagonists in area V2,
otherwise, they're lurking outside the vault, waiting for
the characters to emerge:

. If Xanathar is the main villain, Noska Ur'gray (see
appendix B) arrives with six bugbears and a gazer
(see appendix B). If Noska is dead or otherwise indis-
posed, the beholder replaces him with Nar'l Xibrindas
(see appendix B) and his grell bodyguard.

« If the Cassalanters are the villains, they send three
cult fanatics and three cultists. Victoro's doppel-
ganger manservant, Willifort Crowelle, leads the
group in his tiefling guise unless the characters killed
him or otherwise disposed of him earlier in this chap-
ter or in chapter 6.

« If Jarlaxle Baenre (see appendix B) is the villain, he
arrives with three drow gunslingers (see appendix B).
Replace no-name drow gunslingers with Fel'rekt La-
feen, Krebbyg Masq'il'yr, and Soluun Xibrindas if they
are alive and free.

+ If Manshoon is the main villain, he sends his simula-
crum (see appendix B) along with Agorn Fuoco (NE
male Turami human bard; see appendix B), Vevette
Blackwater (CE female Tethyrian human swashbuck-
ler; see appendix B), and three Zhent thugs. If Agorn
and Vevette were killed or otherwise disposed of
earlier in this chapter or in chapter 8, replace each of
them with one additional thug.

The forces sent by Xanathar, the Cassalanters, and
Manshoon attack the characters on sight. Jarlaxle, on
the other hand, congratulates characters for unlocking
the Vault of Dragons and allows them to leave on the
condition that they go empty-handed. He intends to see
the gold safely returned to the city of Waterdeep but also
demands the dragonstaff of Ahghairon for his trouble.

If Aurinax is alive, the characters can lure enemies to
the dragon. Aurinax attacks any creature that attacks
him or tries to steal his staff or the gold. He also defends
the characters if he has made a deal with them.

FACTION REINFORCEMENTS
[f the characters joined one or more factions in Water-

deep and kept them informed of their progress, you can

have reinforcements arrive to help combat the villains or

introduce a new element to the situation.

Bregan D’aerthe, 1f Jarlaxle Baenre (sce appendix
B) isn't the main villain, he arrives with his lieutenants,

Fel'rekt Lafeen, Krebbyg Masq'il'yr, and Soluun Xibrin-
das, or three other drow gunslingers (see appendix B).
Jarlaxle offers to help the characters if they agree to help
him secure the gold for Waterdeep and the dragonstaff
of Ahghairon for himself.

Harpers. Mirt (see appendix B) arrives with two
female human swashbucklers (see appendix B). If |
he’s still alive and not already with the characters, Re- J
naer Neverember (see appendix B) replaces one of the
swashbucklers. =

Emerald Enclave. Jeryth Phaulkon sends three -
swarms of rats to assist the characters. Once the char- &l
acters are no longer in peril, the rats disperse through- '
out the vault,

Force Grey. Vajra Safahr sends Meloon Wardragon
(see appendix B) to help the characters secure the vault, s -
unaware that Meloon has fallen under Xanathar's sway. |
If Xanathar is the main villain, Meloon helps the beheld-
er's forces defeat the characters.



@@@ 19 @@@



Lords’ Alliance. Open Lord Laeral Silverhand (see
appendix B) arrives with Jalester Silvermane (sce
appendix B) and six City Guard veterans to help charac-
ters secure the gold. Laeral’s arrival forces Jarlaxle to be
on his best behavior. After assuring Laeral of his good
intentions, Jarlaxle cuts his losses and withdraws peace-
fully. If she is able to speak with Aurinax, Laeral con-
vinces the dragon to relinquish the gold into her custody.

Order of the Gauntlet. Hlam (see appendix B) ar-
rives and aids the characters as best he can. He and
Aurinax met each other many years ago, and they are
on fair speaking terms. Aurinax is fond of the monk,
and characters who negotiate with the dragon in Hlam’s
presence gain advantage on their Charisma (Persua-
sion) checks.

Zhentarim, The Doom Raiders (see appendix B)
arrive to help secure the vault, less any members who
have been arrested or killed. [f Manshoon is the main
villain, Skeemo Weirdbottle betrays his fellow Doom
Raiders and fights alongside Manshoon’s simulacrum. If
they and the characters emerge victorious, the surviving
Doom Raiders propose to split the take evenly with the
characters. If the characters refuse this offer and the
Doom Raiders outnumber them, the Zhents turn against
them, putting characters who are Zhentarim members
in a predicament.

ADVENTURE CONCLUSION

The adventure could play out in any of several ways,
depending on who gets the gold and what's done with
the treasure.

DYING IN THE VAULT

If the characters die in the Vault of Dragons with the
Stone of Golorr and the main villain doesn’t know the
vault’s location, the secrets of the vault die with them.
Though they succumbed in the process, they succeeded
in keeping the gold out of the villain's clutches—a bitter-
sweet victory, indeed.

REMOVING THE GOLD

If the characters recover Neverember's hoard and keep
it for themselves, word gets out eventually.

Emissaries of the Harpers, the Lords’ Alliance, and
the Order of the Gauntlet come to the characters, asking
that the gold be returned to Waterdeep. If the characters
refuse to give it up, they are stripped of any member-
ships they might hold in these factions and quickly find
themselves in political hot water. The Lords of Water-
deep charge them with the crime of robbery against the
citizens of the city. The characters face up to 1 month of
hard labor plus damages equal to the value of the stolen
currency plus 500 gp. If they try to flee the city, the City
Guard apprehends and imprisons them. If they some-

. how evade the local authorities, the Harpers and agents
of the Lords’ Alliance pursue them tirelessly.

CHAPTER 4 | DRAGON SEASQON

Laeral Silverhand is prepared to let the characters
keep one-tenth of the treasure (50,000 gp) for them-
selves. Even that much coin attracts unwanted attention,
in the form of several people who beg loans or donations
from them:

+ Emmek Frewn (see “Business Rival: Emmek Frewn,”
page 42) needs 1,500 gp to pay off a loan with in-
terest. If he doesn't repay the coin in a tenday, Istrid
Horn (see appendix B) sends Zhentarim thugs to
threaten, if not hurt, him. Emmek comes to the char-
acters with hat in hand, preving on their generosity
while denying any wrongdoing on his part.

. Davil Starsong (see appendix B) asks the characters
for a donation of 5,000 gp to keep his branch of the
Zhentarim afloat in Waterdeep. Recent altercations
and legal issues have drained the Doom Raiders’ cof-
fers. If the characters refuse, the Doom Raiders are
driven out of the city, yielding control of the Zhentarim
in Waterdeep to Manshoon (if he's alive).

+ Floon Blagmaar (see appendix B) asks the characters
to give him 500 gp to cover a hefty gambling debt. If
the characters refuse to give Floon the gold, he van-
ishes without a trace 1d10 days later.

. Volothamp Geddarm (see appendix B) asks the

characters for 5,000 gp to fund an expedition that he

hopes will inspire a future book, for which he’ll give
them special mention in said masterwork. If the char-
acters seem hesitant, Volo reminds them that were it
not for his starting them off on this adventure, they
wouldn't have the gold in the hrst place.

Jelenn Urmbrusk, a Masked Lord in debt to Man-

shoon, requests an interest-free loan of 10,000 gp,

which she vows to repay within a year. In exchange,
she promises to use her “considerable influence with
the Lords of Waterdeep” to help them in the future. If
the characters oblige, she makes good on her prom-
ise to pay them back and grants them a special favor

(see “Marks of Prestige” in chapter 7 of the Dungeon

Master's Guide). If they refuse, they will have made an

enemy of the secret Masked Lord.

« Temples, charities, guilds, and down-on-their-luck
strangers come knocking from time to time. What
they ask for isn’t much—a few gold here and there—
but it all adds up.

ONWARD AND DOWNWARD

The characters should be 5th level by the end of this
adventure. In the weeks that follow, word of their deeds
spreads to every corner of Waterdeep. Finally, a note is
delivered to them that reads as follows:

—

Undermountain beckons. See you at the Yawning Portal. l

If the characters want to explore Undermountain, you
can continue this campaign up through 20th level with
the book Waterdeep: Dungeon of the Mad Mage,



@@@ 20 @@@



ANATHAR HAS LET ITS PARANOIA GET THE
better of it, and the beholder trusts no
one, The Stone of Golorr disappeared
from its lair while it was brokering a
deal that would have merged the Xana-
thar Guild and the Zhentarim into a
single criminal organization. Although the Zhents didn't
steal the Stone of Golorr, Xanathar believes they did.
Once content to merely possess the stone, the beholder
is no longer confident of the gold's safety in the Vault of
Dragons. Xanathar thinks that the gold would be safer
under its watchful gaze, but without the Stone of Golorr,
it can’t remember where the gold is hidden.

Before running this chapter, review the “Beholders”
section of the Monster Manual, particularly the section
titled "A Beholder's Lair.” Within its lair, Xanathar has
access to lair actions, and characters might encounter
the beholder’s regional effects as well.

Characters who don't visit Xanathar’s lair in the
course of this adventure might have reason to do so in
Waterdeep: Dungeon of the Mad Mage. In that adven-
ture, the characters are most likely to approach the be-
holder’s lair from Skullport (see area X4 for details).

As they explore Xanathar's lair, characters will see a
recurring symbol that looks like a circle with ten equi-
distant spokes radiating out from its circumference.
This symbol is Xanathar's personal rune as well as the
symbol used to represent the Xanathar Guild.

FACING XANATHAR

Roll percentile dice to determine the beholder's location
when the characters arrive, and consult the Xanathar's

Location table.

XANATHAR'S LOCATION

d100 Location

01-50 Xanathar is talking to Sylgar, its pet fish, in area X19.

51-75 Xanathar is delivering a rambling sermon te min-
ions in the audience chamber (area X18).

76-90 Xanathar is watching a fight in the Pit of Blood and
Fortune (area X6).

91-00 Xanathar is contemplating its mortality in the crypt,
amid the remains of past Xanathars (area X33j,

If the characters attack the beholder, it destroys one
character and tries to subjugate the rest. In exchange for
their lives, the survivors must agree to help the beholder
find the Stone of Golorr. If they refuse, the beholder
destroys another character and repeats the offer. This
process continues until the characters comply or none )
are left. Those who agree to the beholder’s terms are
permitted to leave with their lives,

If the characters give Xanathar the stone, it demands
that they accompany it to the Vault of Dragons and
help it defeat the vault’s draconic guardian. Not fully

CHAPTER 5 | SPRING MADNESS

@@@ 1 @@@



trusting the characters to keep their part of the bargain,
Xanathar brings along its majordomo, Ahmaergo, to
keep an eye on them.

If Xanathar is reduced to half its maximum hit points,
or if it believes its life to be in mortal danger, it activates
its ring of invisibility and howls to Ahmaergo to “tear
the usurpers limb from limb.” While invisible, Xanathar
flies to its sanctum (area X19) by the safest route.

Xanathar's greatest weakness is its insane love for its
pet fish, Sylgar. A character who uses the fish for lever-
age can make a DC 16 Charisma (Intimidation) check.
On a success, the fearsome beholder becomes a blub-
bering mess and acquiesces to almost any request the
character makes. On a failure, Xanathar demands that
the character release Sylgar at once or be disintegrated
(and makes good on its threat).

FoIiLING XANATHAR'S

OPERATION

Killing the beholder is probably beyond the characters’
capabilities, but they can sabotage its operation in sev-
eral ways, affecting either the beholder personally or the
smooth functioning of the Xanathar Guild. They might
even be able to marshal sufficient resources (including
enough explosives) to bring down Xanathar’s lair.

ENRAGE XANATHAR

Xanathar's mental state is precarious. Whenever it flies
into a rage, the beholder tends to kill random minions.

ABDUCT OR KILL SYLGAR

Killing or stealing Xanathar's pet fish and preventing
the fishkeeper, Ott Steeltoes, from replacing it causes
Xanathar to become enraged.

DESTROY THE DREAM NULLIFIER

Xanathar's “dream nullifier” in area X 20 gives it peace
of mind and helps it sleep. Destroying this contraption
makes the beholder unhappy.

TAKE ITs FOOp Away
Xanathar eats meals prepared by the kobold chefs in

area X30. Killing these kobolds or otherwise preventing
them from preparing meals makes Xanathar furious.

DisrurT COMMAND

Even though the beholder is the supreme leader of the
Xanathar Guild, its lieutenants manage the guild’s day-
to-day operations. The chain of command can be dis-
rupted in any of the following ways.

ASSASSINATION

Killing one of Xanathar's most trusted underlings, such
as Ahmaergo or Noska Ur'gray, throws the day-to-day
operation of the guild into chaos for a tenday.

BLIND XANATHAR

Nar'l Xibrindas (see appendix B) has concocted a poison
that can blind Xanathar and throw the guild into chaos.

| R CHAPTER 5 | SPRING MADNESS

IMPORTANT UNDERLINGS

Xanathar relies on underlings for advice, information, and
day-to-day oversight of the Xanathar Guild. The following
important underlings are described in appendix B:

Ahmaergo, dwarf majordomo
Nar'l Xibrindas, drow advisor
Nihiloor, mind flayer

Noska Ur'gray, dwarf enforcer

Ott Steeltoes, dwarf fishkeeper
Thorvin Twinbeard, dwarf engineer

'—

Sow MISTRUST

If the beholder is tricked into believing there's a conspir-
acy to kill it or Sylgar, it disintegrates the suspected con-
spirators, leaving gaping holes in the chain of command.

DESTROY THE LAIR

Nar'l Xibrindas has smuggled smokepowder into the lair
(see area X36) and, with Thorvin Twinbeard’s help, iden-
tified areas that are structurally unstable. If these areas
all suffer catastrophic damage, the lair collapses over
the course of 1 hour. Characters can learn this informa-
tion by speaking to Thorvin in area X13. The unstable
areas are as follows:

Area X2, in the threshold of the secret door
Area X6, at the top of the stone buttresses
Area X17, at the base of any three pillars
Area X20, against the back wall

Area X22, between the columns

Area X30, anywhere in the kitchen

Area X33, anywhere in the crypt

As its lair collapses, Xanathar uses its Disintegration
Ray to carve an escape tunnel and flees to safety with
minor injuries. It uses its Telekinetic Ray to transport
its pet fish, Sylgar, if it's within range. Underlings can
flee with the beholder or through the tunnel to Skullport
(area X4). Those who can't accomplish either of these
things are killed in the collapse.

X ANATHAR'S LAIR

Xanathar's lair is an ancient dungeon complex originally
built by Netherese wizards and expanded by beholders
over time. It connects to the subterranean town of Skull-
port by way of a long tunnel (area X4). A secret staircase
(area X1) gives access to Waterdeep's sewers.

The lair has the following features, with exceptions
noted in the text:

« Unless noted otherwise, rooms are 20 feet high and
hallways are 15 feet high.

« Rooms and corridors are brightly lit by continual
flame spells cast on wall sconces.

- Most doors are single, circular slabs of stone, 8 feet in
diameter and 6 inches thick, with stone hinges on one
side. Double doors are 16-foot-wide, 8-foot-high semi-
circles that split open down the middle. Doorknobs
are set into stone fixtures shaped like Xanathar’s sym-
bol. (Xanathar can open or close an unlocked door us-
ing its Telekinetic Ray, or obliterate a locked one with

its Disintegration Ray.)



@@@ 2 @@@



GETTING TO THE LAIR

Very few members of the Xanathar Guild have access to
the beholder’s secret lair. If the characters want to get
there, the f_tl“t_l‘u'n.'i‘,nf_}; factions know where it is and can
help them find it.

BREGAN D'AERTHE

Jarlaxle has a spy in the Xanathar Guild: the advisor
Nar'l Xibrindas, who uses sending spells to transmit in-
telligence to his drow brethren. Bregan D'aerthe knows
that the safest route to the beholder’s lair is a secret
staircase in the sewers of the Castle Ward. Any charac-
ter who belongs to this faction can get this information
from Jarlaxle or another source.

If the party includes at least one Bregan D'aerthe
member with renown of 4 or more in the faction, four
male drow are waiting for the party at the top of the
staircase. Their names are Arannis Nur'zekk, Beldar
Tiabbath, Rylvar Tiabbath, and Draknafein Uriss. Their

orders are to help the characters complete their mission.

whatever the cost, These drow also have secret orders
to kill Nar'l Xibrindas, if he's still alive, and retrieve Jar-
laxle's bag of holding (see area X35). If you're tracking
experience points, each drow gets an equal share of the
XP while a member of the adventuring party.

HARPERS
Characters who belong to the Harpers can approach
Mirt (see appendix B), who knows the location of Xana-

thar's lair. (He has dealt with the beholder many times
as a Lord of Waterdeep.)

Mirt leads the characters to a secret staircase in the
Castle Ward sewers (area X1). As the characters pre-
pare to descend the stairs, Mirt tells them that Xanathar
doesn't relate well to humanoids, doesn't trust them as a
matter of course, and is prone to imagining conspiracies
where none exist. He also tells the characters that Xana-
thar has a pet fish and is insanely protective of it.

Mirt won't accompany the adventurers. but he knows
a secret that could be helpful: Thorvin Twinbeard, Xana-
thar's chief engineer, is a Harper informant. Mirt shares
this secret with any character who has renown of 4 or
higher in the Harper faction.

LORDS" ALLIANCE

Characters who are members of the Lords’' Alliance
can reach out to Jalester Silvermane (see appendix B).
Jalester doesn't know the location of Xanathar's lair but
can get the details from Laeral Silverhand.

With the information in hand, Jalester leads the party
lo a secret staircase in the Castle Ward sewers (area
Xl). As the characters prepare to descend the stairs, Jal-
ester warns them to avoid confronting the paranoid and
unpredictable beholder. |

If one or more characters have renown of 4 or higher
in the Lords’ Alliance, Jalester offers to join the party on
its mission into Xanathar's lair. If you're tracking experi-
ence points, Jalester gets an equal share of the XP while
a member of the adventuring party.



@@@ 3 @@@



EMERALD ENCLAVE

Characters who are members of the Emerald Enclave
can learn the location of Xanathar's lair by speaking
with Jeryth Phaulkon at Phaulkonmere. Jeryth tells
them that she has been sending awakened rats into the
sewers to find the beholder’s lair, and that they recently
discovered a secret staircase in the Castle Ward sewers
leading down to it (area X1). She has one of the awak-
ened rats lead them there. This rat has an Intelligence
score of 10 and can speak Common.

ZHENTARIM

Characters who are members of the Zhentarim can
approach Yagra Stonefist at the Yawning Portal (see
“Familiar Faces,” page 20). She recently learned

about a “back door” to the beholder’s lair from a
drunken blabbermouth with ties to the Xanathar Guild.
Yagra offers to lead them to a secret staircase in the
sewers under the Castle Ward (area X1). “Trust me,” she
says, “it's safer than the route through Undermountain
and Skullport.”

Yagra will join their descent if the characters promise
to pay her at least 1,000 gp. Otherwise, she wishes them
well and heads back to the Yawning Portal. If you're
tracking experience points, Yagra gets an equal share of
the XP while a member of the adventuring party.

AREAS OF THE LAIR

The following areas correspond to the labels on map
5.1. This lair has two levels connected by staircases and

secret doors.

X1. STAIRCASE OF EYES
Characters are most likely to enter Xanathar's lair by
this route: a spiral staircase accessible from the Castle
Ward's sewers and hidden behind a secret door. This
staircase circumvents a more difficult route through
Undermountain and Skullport, which is described in
Waterdeep: Dungeon of the Mad Mage.

When the characters find the staircase, read:

The walls of this narrow, spiraling staircase are carved

with opened eyes that glow with a faint, magical light.
L] .

Characters feel as though they're being watched as they
descend the stairs, and the feeling doesn't go away once
they enter the beholder’s lair. The dimly lit staircase
descends for hundreds of feet, ending before a circular
stone door that swings open into area X2.

X2. WATCHED HALL
This magically lit hall has the following features:

« The walls are carved with eyes of all shapes and sizes.
Many of the orbs have stone eyelids that open and

close at irregular intervals.

» Characters who succeed on a DC 14 Wisdom (Percep-
tion) check notice a ghostly eyestalk (scrying sensor)
protruding from the ceiling directly in front of the dou-

ble door to the south.
« A secret door is hidden in the west wall.

CHAPTER 5 | SPRING MADNESS

Blinking Eyes. The blinking eye carvings are slightly
unnerving but harmless.

Scrying Sensor. The ghostly eyestalk is a magical
sensor that aifows one of the apprentice wizards in area
X16 to monitor this hall, The eyestalk functions as an
extra eye with darkvision out to a range of 60 feet. A
character can ascertain the eyestalk's function with a
successful DC 10 Intelligence (Arcana) check but can’t
determine who's peering through it, or from where. The
evestalk can’t be damaged but is destroyed by a dispel
magic spell. The sensor is suppressed within the area of
an antimagic field.

Secret Door. The secret door can be found with a
successful DC 15 Wisdom (Perception) check. To open
it, one must press a nearby wall carving shaped like an
eve. When this is done, the secret door swings inward,
revealing a curved hallway (area X8) beyond.

X3. BEHOLDER ZOMBIE GUARD

A beholder zombie guards this magically lit room. Sur-
rounding it are four gas spores, which look like imma-
ture beholders at first glance. All five creatures float in
the middle of the room.

The beholder zombie is all that remains of a beholder
that arose from the Underdark to challenge Xanathar's
supremacy. After defeating its rival, Xanathar had the
corpse animated and transformed into a lair guardian.
The gas spores were added later.

The beholder zombie allows creatures that brandish
the symbol of Xanathar to pass unmolested. Otherwise,
it attacks. The gas spores don't attack but explode if they
take any damage. The beholder zombie is immune to
their Death Burst trait.

X4. TUNNEL TO SKULLPORT

This magically lit tunnel extends 300 feet eastward off
the map. It ends at a staircase that climbs 20 feet to the
Guts & Garters Inn, an establishment located in the sub-
terranean town of Skullport, which is under Xanathar's
control. See Waterdeep: Dungeon of the Mad Mage for
more information on the inn and Skullport.

X5. HORROR'S ALCOVE

A suit of animated armor with Xanathar's symbol
embossed on its breastplate stands in this alcove, ap-
pearing at a glance to be an ornate but inanimate suit of
armor on display. It remains inert until it takes damage
or is summoned to area X6 by Xanathar. (The beholder
uses it to keep the spectators in the arena from getting
too rowdy.)

X6. P11 OF BLOOD AND FORTUNE

Xanathar has turned this room into a gladiatorial arena.

It also uses this location to dispose of underlings it no

longer trusts in a manner that it considers entertaining.
This area has the following features:

« A magically lit, circular chamber has a thin layer of
blood-soaked sand covering the floor and stone but-
tresses supporting its 40-foot-high domed ceiling.

» Ten-foot-high stone bleachers hug the northwest half
of the room. Staircases lead from the bleachers to
other areas of the lair, and a tunnel under the bleach-
ers leads west to the monster cell block (area X7).



@@@ 4 @@@



7

'1

o ]
1 square = 10 feet A,I (/A kTI;*?
i % ] )

To Skullport

. , - e D - ol oy ;, -
T S Vs
h. AR "4 \y _;..\. i | ¢ : . '
i - — = - . ' ;
r — . : . “ANEIING 1@' Z q ™

\ 7N —

CHAPTER 5 | SPRING MADNESS



@@@ 5 @@@



- A semicircular recess in the southeast wall has steps
leading up to it. Its floor is 5 feet higher than the arena
floor, and the alcove is decorated with bouquets of Un-
derdark fungi in stone vases and purple tapestries that
bear Xanathar's symbol. Jutting from the curved roof
of the alcove is a spectral eyestalk (scrying sensor).

» A secret door is hidden in the south wall.

If Xanathar is elsewhere, the arena is empty but under
surveillance (see “Scrying Sensor” below).

If Xanathar is present, it hovers in the southeast al-
cove and uses its ring of invisibility to remain unseen.
Standing on the steps of the alcove are two dwarves:
Xanathar's majordomo, Ahmaergo (see appendix B),
who presides over fight tournaments, and Xanathar's
chief enforcer, Noska Ur'gray (see appendix B), who
releases arena combatants from area X7. Ten human
bandits and five bugbears (all members of the Xana-
thar Guild) guzzle ale and heckle combatants from the
bleachers, while two goblins serve up salted rat intes-
tines and stirge meat pies.

Joining a Tournament, 1f the characters enter during
a tournament, they see a minotaur battling a scarred
female halfling, Samara Strongbones (see area X7).
The halfling doesn’t want to die in a pointless battle and
screams for help. If the characters intervene, the arena
spectators turn violent and attack them. If the charac-
ters let the fight play out, Noska escorts the victor back
to area X7 while Ahmaergo goads characters into join-
ing the tournament. If the characters aren’t willing to en-
ter the tournament, Ahmaergo has them beaten uncon-
scious and locked up while Xanathar watches silently.

Rules for running a tournament are described at
the end of this chapter (see “Blood and Fortune,” page
114). If a character joins the tournament and wins, or
defeats its underlings, Xanathar is impressed enough to
grant the party an audience, during which it tries to sub-
jugate them (see “Facing Xanathar,” page 99),

Scrying Sensor. The spectral eyestalk is a magical
sensor, which allows an apprentice wizard in area X16
to monitor this room. See area X2 for more information.

Secret Door. The secret door in the south wall can
be found with a successful DC 15 Wisdom (Perception)
check. It pushes open to reveal area X33 beyond.

X7. CELL BLOCK

This area contains four cells separated by bars. The
rectangular iron doors have locks built into them, and
Noska Ur'gray carries the keys. Picking a lock requires
a successful DC 15 Dexterity check using thieves' tools.
Breaking down a cell door requires a successful DC 25
Strength (Athletics) check. The Cell Occupants table
lists this area’s prisoners.

CeLL OccuPANTS

Cell Prisoners
A A male half-ogre named Groz, a minotaur named Um-

pok, and a female orog named Charworl
B Kidnapped Waterdavians: Xia Shung (NG female Shou

human bard; see appendix B), Claudio Benzreck (LN
male Tethyrian human noble), and Arthright Grayfal-
con (CN male Illluskan swashbuckler; see appendix B)

CHAPTER 5 | SPRING MADNESS

Cell Prisoners

C A female drow named Raelyn Auvryndar, recently sep-
arated fram her companion and subordinate, Zaibon
Kyszalt (see area X24)

D  Samara Strongbones, a female lightfoot halfling, is a
Zhentarim spy in league with Manshoon. She is cha-
otic evil and has these racial traits: She is Small, and
her walking speed is 25 feet. She can move through
the space of any Medium or larger creature. She has
advantage on saving throws against being frightened.
She speaks Common, Halfling, and Undercommon,

X8. HALL OF STATUES

This 20-foot-wide, magically lit hallway connects vari-
ous areas controlled by the Xanathar Guild. It has the
following features:

+ Lifelike humanoid statues dot the hall.

« The first time the characters explore the hall, a deep
gnome in clownish garb is dancing and cartwheeling
up and down the hall, between the statues.

Gnome Clown. The garishly dressed deep gnome,
Flutterfoot Zipswiggle, serves Xanathar as a jester.

He carries a packet containing dust of disappearance.
Unknown to Flutterfoot, the beholder has tired of

the gnome and plans to turn him to stone when next
they meet.

Flutterfoot knows the features and layout of Xana-
thar’s lair, as well as the beholder’s current whereabouts
and the locations of secret doors, except the ones |lead-
ing to area X36, He gleefully offers to serve as a guide if
the characters correctly answer the following riddle:

| come with a smile;

In slaughter, I rest;

| can be contagious,
But my medicine is best.

What am I?

The answer to Flutterfoot's riddle is “laughter.” If the
characters give the wrong answer, the gnome sprinkles
himself with dust of disappearance, turns invisible,
and flees.

Lifelike Statues. The statues are the petrified re-
mains of intruders and Xanathar Guild members that
were turned to stone by Xanathar. There are a dozen
statues in all: four humans, three goblins, two drow, a
dwarf, a halfling, and a tiefling.

Secret Door. The secret door to area X2 is clearly vis-
ible from this side. It is opened by turning a stone knob
on the adjacent wail.

X9. GuiLD BARRACKS
This magically lit room has the following features:

+ The walls are covered with lewd graffiti written in
Common, Dwarvish, Goblin, and Undercommon.

« In the front of the room is a ramshackle wooden table
surrounded by empty barrels and casks that serve as
stools. Drained tankards are strewn across the table-
top and the floor.

+ A dozen moldy bunk beds are arranged in two rows at
the back of the room.



@@@ 6 @@@



Xanathar Guild Members. When they're not watch-
ing a tournament in the arena (area X6) or listening to
Xanathar give a speech in the audience chamber (area
X18), ten human bandits, members of the Xanathar
Guild, sleep here. They're so drunk that, for the next few
hours, they awaken only if they take damage. Also, they
are poisoned while they remain intoxicated.

X10. NOSKA'S QUARTERS

Xanathar's enforcer, Noska Ur'gray (see appendix
B), resides in this magically lit room when he’s not

in the arena (area X6). The room contains the follow-
ing features:

« A marble bathtub with clawed feet rests in the middle
of the room, next to a large wooden cage containing a
rust monster.

« Along the walls are piles of broken and rusted hel-
mets, shields, and weapons.

» Hanging from hooks on the back wall are three man-
nequins made of straw and canvas, with a multitude of
crossbow bolts sticking in them.

Noska keeps the rust monster as a pet and feeds it
items from the piles of discarded helms, shields, and
armaments. He uses the mannequins for target practice.
The bathtub, which he has converted into a bed, is pad-
ded with straw and mangy furs.

Wooden Cage. A simple latch holds the cage door
shut. The rust monster can’t harm anyone while
trapped inside.

Treasure. Hidden under a pile of rusty weapons is a
wooden chest containing Noska's personal hoard: 37 gp,
151 sp, 360 cp, and four bloodstones (worth 50 gp each).

X1l. AHMAERGO'S COLLECTION
Xanathar’s majordomo fetishizes minotaurs and has
decorated this magically lit room accordingly:

» A stuffed, glowering minotaur stands at the north end
of the room. A large greataxe rests on a wooden rack
in front of it

. In the middle of the room is a 10-foot-long, 5-foot-
wide, 3-foot-high rectangular slab of stone with a
hand-carved. miniature model of a stone maze atop it.

Stone Maze. A detect magic spell reveals an aura of
conjuration magic around the model maze. A creature
that touches the maze becomes the target of a maze
spell (save DC 15). Once the effect triggers, it can't do so
again until the next dawn.

Stuffed Minotaur. When someone other than Ah-
maergo opens the southern door, the skefeton of the
stuffed minotaur erupts out of its skin, becoming an
animated minotaur skeleton, and arms itself with the
greataxe, It attacks all intruders, pursuing any who
flee into area X8 or X12. The minotaur skeleton obeys
Ahmaergo’s commarnds,

X12. AHMAERGO'S QUARTERS

The magical lights in this room have heen dispelled, ren-

dering the chamber dark, Characters who have a light
source or darkvision can discern the following features:

« The room has been converted into a maze, its walls
made of stacked crates nailed together with boards.
The walls rise to meet the 20-foot-high ceiling.

« Humanoid bones litter the floor. (Ahmaergo gathered
the bones from Undermountain and put them here as
grisly decorations.)

The maze fills the entire room but for a 10-foot-square
area in the southwest corner, where Ahmaergo keeps a
wooden chest and a bed made from the skulls, bones,
hide, and fur of minotaurs.

Getting through the maze takes time but isn't difficult,
except that Ahmaergo has rigged a tripwire halfway
through. A character in the lead who is searching for
traps spots the tripwire with a successful DC 12 Wis-
dom (Perception) check. Once spotted, it can easily be
avoided or disarmed. If the trap is triggered, the walls
of the maze come crashing down. Every creature in the
collapsing maze is hit by debris and must make a DC
12 Dexterity saving throw, taking 10 (3d6) bludgeoning
damage on a failed saving throw, or half as much dam-
age on a successful one.

Treasure. Ahmaergo’s chest contains 121 gp in a sack
made of stitched flesh, a carved malachite figurine of a
minotaur (worth 250 gp), and a poiion of healing.

X13. THORVIN'S WORKSHOP
Double doors swing open into a magically lit chamber
containing the following:

+ Thorvin Twinheard (see appendix B). Xanathar's en-
gineer, is building a large contraption in the middle
of the room. Floating nearby is an albino gazer (see
appendix B).

+ Tools cover stone tables throughout the room. (There
are enough tools here to assemble two sets of mason's
tools, one set of smith's tools, and two sets of tin-
ker's tools.)

+ Other furnishings include a cot and a stack of wooden
casks filled with Wyrmwizz Ale (a Skullport brew).

Albino Gazer. Xanathar dreamed this gazer into ex-
istence and sent it to spy on Thorvin, whose loyalty the
beholder is beginning to question. The gazer is itself dis-
loyal. A wizard character can befriend it with a success-
ful DC 11 Charisma (Persuasion) check and turn it into
their familiar with a find familiar ritual, When the gazer
becomes a familiar, its alignment changes to match that
of its new master.

Thorvin Twinbeard. When it is finished, Thorvin's
contraption will enable Xanathar to pulverize creatures
that it petrifies, turning them into a fine powder that can
be used to make plaster. The pulverizer consists mainly
of a tall stone bin with grinding gears at the bottom, and
a chute where the powdered stone pours out.

The pulverizer is a pet project of Thorvin's that allows
him to hang around Xanathar's lair and gather infor-
mation. which he sells to the Harpers. (Thorvin puts
the coin he earns from the faction in a bank, far from
the beholder’s prying eyes.) If one or more characters
approach him and claim to be Harpers, Thorvin is upset
that they would risk exposing him as a spy. pointing to
the albino gazer. If the characters befriend the gazer
and promise to go away, Thorvin truthfully answers as



@@@ 7 @@@



.-l"r-a-ﬁ_hﬂ"lr

many as three questions. He's never seen Ahmaergo's
chambers (areas X11 and X12) but knows the rest of the
lair well.

[f the characters are looking for a way to mess with
Xanathar's operation, Thorvin suggests they coerce
Nar'l Xibrindas, the beholder’s advisor (see area X18),
into giving them the large supply of smokepowder that
he smuggled into the dungeon. Thorvin also tells them
where to plant the smokepowder to cause the most dam-
age (see "Destroy the Lair,” page 100).

X14. SECRET HALLWAY

This magically lit hall is concealed behind secret doors.
It circumvents the audience chamber (area X18) and
gently slopes down toward the east. Finding either se-
cret door requires a successful DC 15 Wisdom {Percep-
tion) check.

X15. STAIRS TO THE MAZE

Characters at the top of these magically lit stairs can
hear loud music and raucous laughter boiling up from
below. The staircase descends 20 feet to area X28.

X16. PANOPTICUS GUARD STATION
This room contains the following features:

« Five bald shield dwarves, their heads covered with
purple eve tattoos, sit around the edge of a glowing
circle on the floor. Their eyes are scrunched shut, but
they are aware of their surroundings.

+ Protruding from the ceiling, directly above the circle,
is a large, flaring bronze "bell” similar in shape to the
mouth of a tuba.

+ Set into the back of a recessed wall is a secret door
that leads to area X17.

Dwarves. The five tattooed dwarves operate Xana-
thar's “panopticus” magical surveillance system. They
fight only in self-defense. They are apprentice wizards
(see appendix B), with these changes:

« They are neutral.

« They have these racial traits: Their walking speed is
25 feet. They have advantage on saving throws against
poison and resistance to poison damage. They have
darkvision out to a range of 60 feet. They speak Com-
mon and Dwarvish,

« Nihiloor the mind Hayer has psychically and surgically
altered the dwarves so that they sleep with one eye
open and half their brains asleep at any time.

Amplification Bell. The bronze bell is connected to
a tube that runs through the stone and into the nearby
audience chamber (area X18). The bell amplifies sounds
underneath it and transmits those sounds to the audi-
ence chamber.

Scrying Circle. A detect magic spell reveals an aura of
divination magic around the circle, which the dwarves
use to scry on various other locations within the dun-
geon: the entrance hall (area X2), the arena (area X6),
the antechamber of madness (area X23), the recreation
hall (area X28), and the downstairs hall (area X32). One



@@@ 8 @@@



dwarf watches each location and communicates what
it sees via the bronze bell. The scrying circle functions
for no one else. It is suppressed within an antimagic
field and can also be dispelled (DC 17). When the cir-
cle ceases to exist, the ghostly eyestalk sensors in the
above-mentioned locations disappear as well.

Secret Door. The secret door can be spotted with a
successful DC 15 Wisdom (Perception) check. A pedal
hidden in the floor, when stepped on, causes the door to
swing inward.

X17. PROMENADE

Pillars carved with eves follow the curvature of the hall,
and these eyes seem to track creatures as they pass by.
This isn't a magical effect but an optical illusion.

Majordomeo. [f he's not with Xanathar in the arena
(area X6), Ahmaergo (see appendix B) is conducting a
routine inspection of the dungeon. The characters can
hear the dwarf's echoing footfalls as he approaches their
location. If he sees intruders and is outnumbered, Ah-
maergo retreats to area X22, heads downstairs to gather
reinforcements from area X28, and leads a search party
to capture the interlopers. If he sees only one intruder,
he draws his axe and attacks.

Secret Door. The northernmost end of this hallway
displays a fresco of a leafless tree that has lidless eyes
embedded in its branches. Pressing a specific eye
causes a door-shaped section of the wall to swing open
into area X16. Characters can find the secret door and
the switch with a successful DC 15 Wisdom (Percep-
tion) check.

X18. AuDIENCE CHAMBER

Xanathar greets visitors and makes speeches to its min-
ions in this 40-foot-high domed chamber. Characters
who were seen by the scrying sensors anywhere in the
dungeon complex can’t surprise the creatures here. The
magically lit room contains the following features:

+ The circular floor is tiled in black marble and bears a
gold mosaic of Xanathar's symbol.

+ Jutting from the ceiling is a bronze, bell-shaped pro-
tuberance. (This fixture is the other end of the sound
amplifier described in area X16.)

+ Displayed against the curved walls are a dozen lifelike
statues (the remains of humans, drow, dwarves, gobli-
noids, and kobolds who defied the beholder).

» Hidden in the floor is a secret trapdoor.

While in this room, Xanathar uses its ring of invisi-
bility to remain unseen and can use a bonus action to
activate or deactivate a psychedelic display of magical
lights, each one the size of a human eyeball. The lights
fill a 10-foat cube in the middle of the room, and the
beholder can throw its voice so that it seems to emanate
from the same area. Any character who succeeds on a
DC 13 Wisdom (Insight) check can tell that the display
isn't the source of the voice.

If the beholder is here, it's using the psychedelic
light display to deliver an incoherent, self-aggrandizing
speech to a group of sycophantic underlings consist-
ing of ten human bandits and two duergar who have
never seen Xanathar's true form. These minions clutch
tankards of Wyrmwizz Ale (a cheap Skullport brew)

and toast Xanathar whenever the beholder commends
itself. Xanathar's treacherous drow mage advisor, Nar'l
Xibrindas (see appendix B), stands in front of the open
door to area X19, clapping weakly at the speech. Float-
ing next to Nar’l is his grell bodyguard. If Xanathar has
been warned that the characters are near, it wraps up its
speech and grants them an audience; see “Facing Xana-
thar,” page 99, for more information.

If Xanathar is elsewhere, this room contains only
Nar'l and the grell. Nar'l tries to lure adventurers into a
showdown with the behoider. If he is wounded, he flees
through the trapdoor in the floor and retreats to area
X35 while the grell covers his escape.

If the party includes members of Bregan D'aerthe and
Nar’'l recognizes them as such, he gives them his vial
of eyescratch poison so they can blind Xanathar with it.
This act of treachery, witnessed by the grell, turns the
creature against him.

Secret Trapdoor. A hidden trapdoor in the floor can
be found with a successful DC 15 Wisdom (Perception)
check. It can be lifted with a successful DC 12 Strength
(Athletics) check, revealing a wooden ladder that leads
down to area X29.

X19. XANATHAR'S SANCTUM
This magically lit room has a flat, 30-foot-high ceiling
and contains several features:

+ Luminous violet particles drift through the air like
mist. A successful DC 12 Intelligence (Nature) check
reveals that these are Underdark spores.

+ A 20-foot-diameter fishbowl dominates the room.
Filled with water, it also contains a small coral reef, a
miniature shipwreck, and a sunken treasure chest,

- A smaller fishbowl, 3 feet in diameter, rests on a ped-
estal next to the farger bowl. A dwarf wearing a skull-
cap adorned with eyestalks feeds a trout-sized fish
that swims in circles in this smaller bowl.

« A 10-foot-diameter silver mirror is embedded in the
western wall. Letters are engraved into its frame.

« The eastern tunnel starts 10 feet above the floor and
gently slopes upward to area X21. (Xanathar uses this
passage as an escape route,)

If Xanathar (see appendix B) is here, it's invisible and
speaking affectionately to the fish while the dwarf, Ott
Steeltoes, feeds it.

Dwarf Fishkeeper. Ott Steeltoes (see appendix B)
is Xanathar's fishkeeper. If he sees intruders and the
beholder isn't present, Ott draws his dagger and stam-
mers, “You shouldn't be here! Stay back, or I'll call the
boss!” Ott can’t telepathically communicate with Xana-
thar, but he thinks he can. He closes his eyes and fran-
tically asks for Xanathar to return to its sanctum and
disintegrate the intruders.

Fishbowls. Xanathar's pet fish, Sylgar, is the only
creature that the beholder loves as much as itself. In
fact, there have been many Sylgars over the years, but
Ott is skilled at acquiring a replacement before Xana-
thar realizes its beloved pet has died.

Sylgar’s large fishbowl weighs about 6,000 pounds,
and the treasure chest at the bottom is real (see “Trea-
sure” below). The small fishhowl weighs 60 pounds

CHAPTER 5 | SPRING MADNESS



@@@ 9 @@@







@@@ 10 @@@



|
5
- i
1

[ I-I-
R ] -Iﬂ' Li‘_rr.. :HH-=
.u : w )



@@@ 11 @@@



and is used primarily for feedings. Xanathar uses its
telekinesis ray to transfer Sylgar from one fishbowl
to another.

Mirror. Carved into the mirror's frame is the word
“Xoblob.” A detect magic spell reveals an aura of divina-
tion magic around the mirror. Speaking the word “Xob-
lob™ within 10 feet of the mirror causes its reflective
surface to become a scrying sensor, showing the Old
Xoblob Shap and the street in front of it, as seen through
the eyes of the stuffed beholder that hangs in the shop’s
display window (see “Old Xoblob Shop,” page 23).

Spores. The purple spores are infused with faerzress,
a magical radiation found in the Underdark. A creature
that ends its turn in the room must succeed on a DC 13
Constitution saving throw or suffer a random form of
short-term madness, determined by rolling on the Short-
Term Madness table in chapter 8 of the Dungeon Mas-
ter’s Guide. A creature doesn't need to inhale the spores
to be affected by them. Once the madness ends, the
creature becomes immune to the spores in this room.,

Treasure. The treasure chest is unlocked and con-
tains thirty 100 gp gemstones. If Xanathar has retrieved
the Stone of Golorr, the artifact is also here.

X20. DREAM NULLIFIER
This side chamber contains the following features:

» A 6-foot-diameter bowl made of crystal lattice pulsates
with multicolored light as it floats 10 feet off the floor.

« A mangy straw pallet lies on the floor under the
bowl, (The fishkeeper, Ott Steeltoes, uses the pallet
as a bed.)

Dream Nullifier. Xanathar hired a wizard to con-
struct a device that would prevent it from accidentally
dreaming another beholder into existence, The bowl-
shaped "dream nullifier” magically wakes Xanathar
when it starts to dream about other beholders. If the
bowl is engulfed by an antimagic field or targeted by a
dispel magic spell or similar effect, it crashes to the floor
and shatters into a million pieces,

X2]. BEHOLDER ESCAPE ROUTE

Set into the floor at the north end of a tunnel that gently
slopes down to area X19 is a circular stone plug that
opens in the ceiling of the hallway below. Xanathar can

il — | .
REPLACING THE MIND FLAYER

Nihiloor the mind flayer has carved out its own lair within
Xanathar's lair (areas X23 through X26), If Nihiloor is
killed earlier in the adventure, replace it with a mind flayer
named Qrr'zarg.

Qrr'zarg comes from a colony of mind flayers in Under-
mountain that wants to implant Xanathar with an illithid
tadpole and, through a magical process called ceremorph-
osis, turn the beholder into a thrall. Qrr'zarq is waiting for
an opportunity to implant the tadpole while Xanathar is
alone and asleep. The mind flayer doesn't want adventur-
ers to complicate or ruin its brilliant plan, which it keeps to
itself. It offers to help characters who agree not to harm it
or the beholder.

F

ICHAPTER 5 | SPRING MADNESS

—-m

lift the plug with its telekinesis ray, creating an opening
just large enough for it to float through. A character can
lift the stone plug with a successful DC 19 Strength
(Athletics) check.

X22. ARRIVAL POINT
Any creature holding the correct key that steps through
the magical portal in area Q11 of the Xanathar Guild
hideout (see chapter 1) appears here, between the col-
umns of rock.

A curling staircase in the southwest corner descends

20 feet to area X32.

X23. ANTECHAMBER OF MADNESS
This great hall has the following features:

+ A kuo-toa whip and six kuo-toa guard the hall. They
gather in front of an iron portcullis in the southeast
corner and tear bits of flesh off the bones of a recently
slain dwarf.

+ A ghostly eyestalk protrudes from the ceiling in the
middle of the hall.

« The floor is littered with bones and covered with a
thin layer of sticky, translucent slime.

Kuo-toa. These insane creatures are under the
control of the mind flayer in area X24 and obey its tele-
pathic commands to the best of their ability. When they
detect intruders, they cry out, “Ooop! Ooop!” to alert
their illithid master, then charge into battle.

Portcullis. The portcullis between this area and area
X24 can be raised with a successful DC 22 Strength
(Athletics) check, or with a knock spell or similar magic.
The lever to raise the portcullis is in area X24.

Scrying Sensor. The ghostly eyestalk is a magical
sensor that allows one of the apprentice wizards in
area X16 to monitor this room. See area X2 for more
information.

Sticky Slime. The slime-covered floor is difficult
terrain for all creatures except kuo-toa, other creatures
that have the Slippery trait, and creatures that fly.

X24. EXTRACTION CHAMBER

A portcullis separates this room from area X23, and
the lever to raise and lower it is set into the north wall.
Characters who peer through the bars of the portcullis
can see the room's contents:

« In the middle of the room, a blood-spattered chair
made of carved stone stands atop a 10-foot-square,
1-foot-high stone slab. Iron manacles are bolted to the
chair's armrests.

+ Trapped in the chair is a stunned and weaponless
male drow in a chain shirt. He is trying to free himself
of his bonds but is making no progress.

Drow Captive. The drow, Zaibon Kyszalt, was cap-
tured in Skullport and brought here for interrogation.
His superior, Raelyn Auvryndar, was also captured and
is confined in area X7. Zaibon wants to free her and
escape into Undermountain, where House Auvryndar
has outposts.

Nihiloor has a key that unlocks the chair’s shackles. A
character can unlock each shackle with a successful DC



@@@ 12 @@@



15 Dexterity check using thieves’ tools, and a creature
shackled to the chair can slip free of these bonds with a
successful DC 25 Dexterity (Sleight of Hand) check.

The mind Aayer has telepathically interrogated Zaibon
and learned about a House Auvryndar plot to conquer
Skullport, as well as mounting tensions between the
drow houses of Auvryndar and Freth. The mind flayer is
getting ready to implant an intellect devourer in Zaibon's
skull, then use him to undermine the drow plot and fo-
ment war between the drow houses. (Were Zaibon less
useful, the mind flayer would have extracted his brain
and turned it into an intellect devourer instead.) Zaibon
knows nothing of the fate that awaits him.

Mind Flayer. 1f the characters haven't already dealt
with Nihiloor, the mind flaver interrupts as they interact
with Zaibon, entering from area X26 with an intellect
devourer in its hands, If Zaibon is free of the chair, he
tries to get as far away from the mind flayer and its “pet”
as he can. Nihiloor doesn't pursue anyone who flees,
trusting that they won't get far.

X25. Foop FOR THOUGHT
This magically lit room contains these features:

« The room reeks of death and carnage.

« Three wooden tables are arranged corner to corner,
forming a triangle, in the middle of the room. The
floor around them is stained with blood,

« Atop two of the tables, held down with leather straps,
are two humans (commoners) dressed like homeless
men. One looks dead, and the other gibbers like a
madman. The third table is bare except for an area of
sticky blood at one end.

Unhappy Meals. The Xanathar Guild captures home-
less Waterdavians and brings them here for Nihiloor to
feed on. After devouring their brains, the mind flayer
gives their corpses to his kuo-toa thralls to eat.

The two men, a locksmith named Skarn Zarphoul
and a broadcrier named Holvan Ebberek, recently
heard a dwarf getting his brain sucked out. Skarn i1s
stunned and catatonic from the shock of it, and Holvan
is a gibbering lunatic. A greater restoration spell or sim-
ilar magic restores either man's sanity. The men were
hooded and brought here separately, so they know noth-
ing of the dungeon’s layout or occupants (other than the
mind flayer). If their sanity is restored, they are eager to
return to their families in Waterdeep.

X26. DEVOURER SPAWNING PooL
This room has the following features:

« In the middle of the area is a 10-foot-diameter, 2-foot-
deep circular pool containing luminous green brine.
Swimming in the brine are four intellect devourers.

« [Ifit has not been encountered and defeated elsewhere,
Nihiloor the mind flayer (see appendix B) is standing
in the pool with the intellect devourers.

- Rusty manacles are bolted to the walls. (Hosts for the
intellect devourers are chained in these jocations.)

The brine is a magical substance that radiates an aura
of transmutation magic under the scrutiny of a detect
magic spell. Nihiloor uses it to transform humanoid
brains into intellect devourers. The process is far from

perfect. A full 90 percent of the brains left in the brine
rot and die, while the remaining 10 percent transform
after marinating for 1d4 + 1 days.

Nihiloor and the intellect devourers make their stand
here. If the characters flee, the mind flaver sends the in-
tellect devourers after them and stays behind.

X27. PRISON

Nihiloor the mind flayer uses this prison to confine
potential hosts for his brood of intellect devourers. Cap-
tured characters might find themselves incarcerated
here until they can be made into hosts. The area con-
tains the following features:

. Eight locked iron doors lead 1o cells, some of which
have bars separating them.

« Three kuo-toa whips stand guard here and attack any
creature other than Nihiloor that enters, including
other kuo-toa. One of the whips carries the keys to the
cell doors on a ring.

« A l-foot-tall hgurine of an otherworldly creature rests
atop a slime-covered alabaster pedestal against the
east wall, between twa cell doors.

Cells. A character outside a cell can pick its lock with
a successful DC 20 Dexterity check using thieves' tools,
Each cell contains a reeking chamber pot and no other
furnishings.

[mprisoned in the westernmost cell along the north
wall is Hyustus Staget, a captain of the City Watch
whom the characters have met (see “The Watch Ar-
rives,” page 27). He was kidnapped while off duty and
is without his armor and weapons, If Hyustus has died
for whatever reason, replace him with a female human
Watch officer named Cressa Galavarco (LG female
Tethyrian veteran with no armor or weapons), Whoever
is here has a date with an intellect devourer.

God Figurine, The figurine on the pedestal is crudely
fashioned out of clay. It has the head of a hammerhead
shark, the upper torso of a bare-chested male, dragon
wings sprouting from its shoulders, and octopus tenta-
cles where its legs should be. The kuo-toa modeled it
after an imaginary god they call Garshoogah.

X28. GuiLp REcrREATION HALL
Deafeningly loud music and chatter fill this magically lit
room, which is decorated like a tavern:

+ Ten human bandits (members of the Xanathar Guild)
sit around two trellis tables, drinking Wyrmwizz Ale,
smoking pipes, clapping their hands, and stomping
their feet while two goblins wearing chamber pots on
their heads dance and sing atop a third table.

« If he's not with Xanathar in the arena (area X6),
Noska Ur'gray (see appendix B) is here, drinking with
the others.

« A wooden rack along the east wall holds five large ale
barrels with spigots punched into them. Protruding
from the ceiling above the barrels is a ghostly eyestalk
(scrying sensor}.

Xanathar Guild Members. These villains are cele-
brating the capture of an off-duty City Watch captain
(see area X27). Characters who eavesdrop on the chat- |
ter hear one guild member say, “We caught ourselves a d

#
-”

\“" -\ t
‘)

CHAPTER 5 | SPRING MADNESS &



@@@ 13 @@@



Watch captain! Ahmaergo says the boss is happier than
a pink lumph, whatever that is. Today, free ale! Tomor-
row, gold and glory!"” This proclamation is followed by
loud cheers.

Goblins. The goblins, Lulz and Vellix, are servers who
have allowed themselves to get swept up in the reverie.
[f a ight breaks out, they hide under a table and throw
themselves at the mercy of the party if the characters
emerge victorious.

Scrying Sensor. The ghostly eyestalk is a magical
sensor that allows one of the apprentice wizards in
area X16 to monitor this room. See area X2 for more
information.

X29. TRAPDOOR

At the top of a staircase is a landing with a ladder lead-
ing up to a stone trapdoor that requires a successful DC
12 Strength (Athletics) check to be lifted. The trapdoor
opens into area X18 above.

X30. XANATHAR'S GOURMET KITCHEN

A delightful aroma wafts down the hall from this
kitchen, blending the scents of rare spices, savory
meats, and fresh herbs. The room contains the follow-
ing features:

» Seven kobolds wearing white toque hats dash be-
tween stout tables, frantically preparing meals for
Xanathar and arranging the food on silver platters.

« Twao gazers (see appendix B) dreamed into reality by
Xanathar oversee the kobolds and use their telekine-
sis rays to hoist and deliver food platters.

+ Two iron stoves stand against the east wall, with a
slender spice rack nestled between them.

When it comes to meals, Xanathar prefers the finest
Sword Coast cuisine, including a healthy diet of mush-
rooms, as opposed to uncooked meat. All the meals pre-
pared here are for the consumption of Xanathar alone.

The gazers attack intruders on sight, while the ko-
bolds flee by the easiest route.

Spice Rack. The rack contains thirty bottles of rare
spices worth 10 gp each.

X31. THE OTHER KITCHEN

Black smoke follows the stench of burned meat and
bread down the hallway. This magically lit kitchen has
‘ the following features:

- A haggard male halfling frantically tries to cook
meat, knead dough, simmer sauce, and mix spices
all at once.

« An iron stove stands against the south wall, and cook-
ing utensils hang from hooks just beyond the hall-
ling's reach.

Halfling Cook. When the halfling spots the charac-
ters, a relieved smile crosses his face. “Finally!” he says
excitedly. “I haven't had a break in half a tenday. Make
sure you stir the sauce once every five minutes,” He then
hands the characters his apron, mistaking them for the
actual kitchen staff.

Bepis Honeymaker is a honey merchant who was kid-
napped from his Trades Ward home a month ago. The
Xanathar Guild tried to ransom him back, but seem-

FCHAPTER 5 | SPRING MADNESS

ingly his relatives either couldn’t pay or decided not to.
(In truth, his rotten in-laws destroyed the ransom notes
and told Bepis's wife and children that he ran away with
another family.) Ahmaergo has put him to work as a
cook but threatens to give him over to the mind flayer
Nihiloor every so often.

Bepis is a strongheart halfling commoner, with
these changes:

+ Bepis is lawful good.

+ He is Small and has 3 (1d6) hit points.

+ He has these racial traits: His walking speed is 25
feet. He can move through the space of a Medium
or larger creature. He has advantage on saving
throws against being frightened. He speaks Common
and Halfling.

X32. STAIRS AND SCRYING SENSOR

A staircase curls up to area X22, and a ghostly evestalk
sprouts from the hallway ceiling. The eyestalk is a mag-
ical sensor that allows one of the apprentice wizards in
area X 16 to monitor this corridor (see area X2 for more
information).

X33. CrYPT OF XANATHARS PAST
This room contains the following features:

» Suspended in floor-to-ceiling erystal cylinders are four
dead beholders preserved in embalming fluid. Magical
lights illuminate the cylinders from within.

» Nine shallow alcoves have murals of beholders
painted on their walls. Standing in each alcove is a
beholder-shaped copper urn atop a green marble ped-
estal. The lid of each urn is molded with ten eyestalks.
(At the back of the westernmost alcove in the north
wall is a secret door.)

+ The western wall is carved to display a scowling be-
holder Ranked by two hooded wizards. Beneath each
wizard's cowl, one glaring eye is visible.

Ranathar (see appendix B), if present, is gazing som-
berly at the tombs of past Xanathars.

Beholder Urns. The copper urns contain the dust
of disintegrated beholders. If the dust from an urn is
poured out, it coalesces into the vague shape of a float-
ing beholder for a few seconds, makes a growling noise,
then loses cohesion and falls to the floor.

Crystal Crypts. Each crystal cylinder has AC 10, 15
hit points, resistance to slashing and piercing damage,
and vulnerability to bludgeoning damage. If a cylinder is
shattered, the fluid within it washes across the floor as
the dead beholder lands with a wet plop and expels 1d4
baby gas spores that grow to full size in 30 days. Any
character infected by these gas spores gains the follow-
ing flaw until the disease is cured: “I hate other behold-
ers. If I see a beholder, I must try to destroy it.”

Secret Door. The secret door can be found with a suc-
cessful DC 15 Wisdom (Perception) check. It pulls open
to reveal area X6 beyond.

Wall Carvings. Any character who studies the carv-
ings an the west wall and succeeds on a DC 12 Wisdam
(Perception) check notices that each wizard's eye is a
button that can be pushed. If a character pushes either
button, or uses an object or spell to do so, the beholder



@@@ 14 @@@



carving on the wall discharges a green ray that the
character can dodge with a successful DC 16 Dexterity
saving throw, If the ray hits, the character appears to be
disintegrated but is actually teleported to area X34a or
X 34b, depending on which button was pushed. Once a
button is pushed, it locks in place for 1 hour and can't
be pushed again until that time elapses. A character can
forcibly reset a button by making a successful DC 20
Dexterity check using thieves' tools.

X34. WizarD TOMBS

These crypts were built to hold the remains of two
wizards who lived in this dungeon complex long before
Xanathar took it over. Only one wizard is entombed
here, however. The fate of the other wizard is unknown.
Both chambers are encased in solid stone and brightly
lit by continual flame spells cast on wall sconces,

X34a. In the middle of this tomb rests a gold marble
sarcophagus, its lid carved in the likeness of a long-
haired human wizard who wears a robe adorned with
closed eyes. The sarcophagus can’t be pried open or
damaged, but if a spell is cast within the tomb, the eyes
of the robe open all at once—an eerie yet harmless ef-
fect—and the lid slowly levitates into the air, revealing
the contents of the sarcophagus: a shriveled, inanimate
mummy wearing eyes of charming. After 1 minute,
the eyes on the lid close as it slowly sinks back dow:,
resealing the sarcophagus until another speil is cast
within the tomb.

A character who dons the eyes of charming can see,
through its blue lenses, a blue metal tile shaped like a
four-pointed star on the west wall. The tile is invisible
otherwise, but can be found with a tactile search and a
successful DC 17 Wisdom (Perception) check. When a
creature wuches the tile, all ereatures in the tomb are
instantly teleported to the arena (area X0).

X34b. This tomb is empty except for an invisible, blue
metal tile on the west wall. It functions identically to the
one in area X34a.

X35. NAR'L XIBRINDAS'S OFFICE

The continual flame spells that once lit this room
have been dispelled. Characters need light sources or
darkvision to see here. The room contains the follow-
ing features:

+ Two open crates rest against the north wall.

+ A stone desk in the southwest corner is completely
free of papers. The chair behind it is carved with a
spider motif.

. Bare stone bookshelves stand against the east wall.

Crates. One crate contains fifty stuffed beholder dolls.
The other contains thirty onyx trophies (worth 25 gp
each) depicting a smiling beholder being caressed by
hands. The dolls and trophies are among the prizes
given to winners of Xanathar's combat tournaments,

Desk. The chair behind the desk has a secret com-
partment under its left armrest that can be found and
opened with a successful DC 15 Wisdom (Perception)
check. This tiny compartment contains a small black

key that unlocks both of the desk drawers. A character g

can pick each lock with a successful DC 17 Dexterity
check using thieves' tools.

The first drawer holds Nar'l's spellbook, a sturdy
tome bound in black leather and wrapped in webbing. It
contains all the spells that Nar’'l has prepared, plus the
sending spell.

The second drawer contains a bag of holding that be-
longs to Jarlaxle Baenre. Nar'l borrowed this magic item
and used it to smuggle kegs of smokepowder into Xana-
thar’s lair (see area X36).

Secret Doors. A stone bookshelf in the southeast cor-
ner of this room retates into the wall, revealing a secret
passage that curves north. A character can find this se-
cret door with a successful DC 15 Wisdom (Perception)
check, or simply by pushing on the bookshelf.

A second secret door at the end of the curved hall can
be found without an ability check; it pulls open to reveal
a dark and dusty chamber (area X36) beyond.

X36. SECrRET RoOoM
This room has the following features:

» The room is unlit and choked with dust and cobwebs.
+ Twenty kegs of smokepowder are neatly stacked in
the middle of the room. Each keg has a paper label,
written on which are the words “SMOKEPOWDER! DO
NOT OPEN!" in Common and Elvish.

Neither Xanathar nor its loyal underlings know this
room exists. When Nar'l found it, he asked to have the



@@@ 15 @@@



adjoining room (area X35) turned into his office so that
he could keep this roum secret. The only other individ-
ual who knows about this room is Thorvin Twinbeard,
Xanathar's chief engineer, but he's not inclined to tell
the beholder about it.

Kegs. Each keg comes with a fuse and holds 5 pounds
of smokepowder (see appendix A). To collapse Xana-
thar's lair, at least two kegs must be placed at each weak
point (see “Destroy the Lair,” page 100).

SPECIAL EVENTS

You can use one or both of the following special events
as the characters make their way through Xanathar's

lair, or as they try to thwart Xanathar's agents in
Waterdeep.

BLOOD AND FORTUNE

The beholder holds gladiatorial tournaments whenever
it needs a little violence to brighten its day. The winners
of a tournament receive trophies, and wagers are made
on the sly.

A single tournament has twelve combatants and con-
sists of three fights with short rests in between. Failure
to heed the following rules result in a combatant’s dis-
qualification:

« All tournament combatants must wait in area X7 until
they're called to area X6 to fight.

« During a fight event, no combatant can leave the arena
or attack anyone who isn't a combatant in that event.

TOURNAMENT STRUCTURE

Noska Ur'gray takes the twelve combatants and as-
sembles them in four teams of three. To keep the fights
interesting, Noska tries to even out the teams as much
as possible. A team might have all player characters, all
NPCs, or a combination of the two,

The first fight pits team 1 against team 2. The second
fight pits team 3 against team 4. The third and final fight
pits the winning teams of the previous two fights against
one another. A fight ends when all combatants on one
team are incapacitated, killed, or disqualified.

WINNING THE TOURNAMENT

Each member of the winning team who survives the
third fight receives a stuffed Xanathar doll with a pocket
in its mouth that holds a 100 gp gemstone, and an onyx
trophy carved to look like a smiling beholder being ca-
ressed by hands (worth 25 gp).

TOURNAMENT WAGERS

Spectators like to place side bets on their favorite teams.
The maximum wager is 10 gp. A character who places
a wager on the team that wins the tournament receives

-winnings equal to five times the wager.

TROLLTIDE SLAUGHTER

Trolltide is a fun springtime holiday for most Waterdeep
denizens, including Xanathar, but the beholder has
planned a cruel twist on the holiday this year.

HAPTER 5 | SPRING MADNESS

ERELT b i i s T

The Xanathar Guild recently captured some trolls in
Undermountain. The trolls are fitted with eyeless helms
and ball-and-chain shackles around their ankles. They
are then set loose in different wards of the city during
Trolltide. When the characters happen upon such a
scene, read:

» L
Children in troll masks run through the fog and drizzle,
knocking on doors and stopping adults in the streets.
Those who aren't placated with candied apples, sticks
of salted meat, and other treats perpetrate all manner of
tricks. A grumpy old woman has a rat thrown in her face.
A burly dwarf has his pipe pilfered.

A small crowd of onlockers is gathered around a ten-
foot-tall wicker effigy of a troll, stamping their feet as two
young men struggle to set the likeness ablaze with sput-
tering torches.

Suddenly a white-haired man bolts toward the crowd,
his face a mask of terror. Behind him lurches a massive,
green-skinned giant dragging a ball and chain across the
cobbled street. A blind helm covers the troll's eyes, but
its mouth is a veritable cavern of sharp teeth. It flails its
arms, slashing at the fog around it, and lets out a horri-
ble walil of frustration. The crowd panics at the sight of it
and flees into the mist and rain. Meanwhile, two mem-
bers of the City Watch sneak up behind the blind troll,
hoping to strike a mortal blow.

The white-haired man is a Waterdavian noble of no
real accomplishments named Bromias Sultlue, When
he sees the characters, he shouts, “It's a troll! Do some-
thing!™ If the characters intervene, the two City Watch
veterans fight alongside them. These constables act on
the same initiative count. On their initiative count each
round, there's a noncumulative 20 percent chance that
another veteran arrives and joins the fray.

The troll is blinded while wearing the eyeless helm,
and the ball-and-chain shackles clamped around its an-
kles reduce its walking speed to 20 feet. In this state, its
challenge rating is 4 (1,100 XP). As the characters battle
the troll, children in troll masks bravely pelt the creature
with candied apples.

DEVELOPMENT

If the characters contribute to the defeat of the troll, the
City Watch is grateful. Bromas Sultlue congratulates
them and spends the next tenday recounting every detail
of the battle to friends and family members. The story
of the characters’ heroism spreads, and they gain many
new patrons at their tavern. For the next six tendays,
when determining the tavern's profitability, add 20 to
rolls on the Running a Business table (see “Tavern
Keeping Expenses,” page 41). Thereafter, add 10 to
such rolls to represent Waterdeep's lingering fondness
for the “Trollslayers of Trollskull Alley.”



@@@ 16 @@@



1.

CHAPTER 6: HELL OF A SUMMER f

ICTORO AND AMMALIA CASSALANTER STRUCK
a deal with Asmodeus, Lord of the Nine
Hells. Three years ago, they traded away the
souls of their children to escape financial
ruin. The soul of their eldest son, Osvaldo,
was taken immediately. What was left behind
was transformed into a chain devil, which
the Cassalanters confined to their attic.
Their two youngest children, Terenzio and Elzerina, are
doomed to lose their souls when they turn nine years
old a mere ten days after Founders' Day, a midsummer
festival that celebrates Waterdeep's founding.

After the deal was struck, the Cassalanters enjoyed a
miraculous comeback. Their banking and money-lend-
ing business thrived while their competition suffered.
The disappearance of their eldest son (and heir appar-
ent) earned them sympathy. Their philanthropic en-
deavors bought them legitimacy and new friends. They
became the envy of Waterdavian nobility in short order.
Seemingly blessed, the Cassalanters attracted new fol-
lowers to their cult of devil worship, which was Asmode-
us s plan all along.

Reneging on a contract with Asmodeus is a luxury
no mortal can afford, but there is a way for Lord and
Lady Cassalanter to save the souls of Terenzio and El-
zerina. A clause in the contract allows them to preserve
their remaining (and future) children's lives by instead
paying “one shy of a million gold coins, and the sacri-
fice of one shy of one hundred unfortunate souls.” The

Cassalanters have most of the coin they need, but they
require the gold from the Vault of Dragons to buy their
children’s salvation without bankrupting themselves,
Victoro is in charge of locating the Vault of Dragons
and securing the gold within it. Ammalia, for her part,
plans to sacrifice ninety-nine souls in one fell swoop by
throwing a feast on Founders' Day featuring poisoned
food. Both the souls and the gold must be paid to As-
modeus at the same time. Foiling either one of these
schemes spells doom for the Cassalanters’ plot and their

youngest children.

CuLT OF ASMODEUS

Lord and Lady Cassalanter are the heads of a secre-
tive cult of Asmodeus, The cult convenes at midnight
once every tenday in the temple of Asmodeus beneath
Cassalanter Villa. During rituals of worship, members
of the cult, including Lord and Lady Cassalanter, wear
crimson robes, golden masks, and golden sacrificial
daggers. The masks and daggers are worth 75 gp each
for the gold alone.

MEET THE CASSALANTERS

e e —

Each member of the Cassalanter family relaxes in differ-
ent parts of the house and reacts separately to the dis-
covery of characters intruding in their home. Lord and
Lady Cassalanter are often out of the house on business,
especially as Founders' Day draws near; they return
home an hour before dinner.

CHAPTER &6 | HELL OF A SUMMER



@@@ 17 @@@



LADY AMMALIA CASSALANTER
Lady Cassalanter reacts with surprise to the sight of
uninvited guests, but quickly conceals her feelings with
a welcoming smile. She attempts to gain the intruders’
confidence by pretending to believe that they are guests
of Victoro's and saying that she simply was not told of
their presence. With this pretense established, she tries
to learn the characters’ true intentions, casting charm
person on the party using a Sth-level spell slot (affecting
up to five creatures within 30 feet) if necessary. Using
magic in this way is illegal, but Ammalia has a lot of
goodwill banked in Waterdeep—enough to curry favor
with a magistrate,

During the hours when Ammalia is home and awake,
her location in the villa can be determined randomly:

d100 Ammalia's Location
01-70 She's tending to her butterfly garden (area C25).
71-90 She's smoking on the balcony (area C25a).
91-00 She's weeping before Osvaldo in the attic
(area C24).

LORD VICTORO CASSALANTER
Victoro Cassalanter reacts with fiery rage to the sight of
uninvited guests. He demands to know their names and
calls for the butler, Willifort Crowelle, to show them out.
If he has the chance, he subtly casts dominate person
on one of the characters using an 8th-level spell slot
(extending its duration to 8 hours) to plant a spy among
their ranks. As soon as the intruders are gone, he retires
to his office (area C6) and uses his action to take total
control of the dominated character. The dominated char-
acter reports to the City Watch that the party broke into
Cassalanter Villa and must be arrested for their crime,
During the hours when Victoro is home and awake,
his location in the villa can be determined randomly:

d100 Victoro's Location
01-70 He’s in his office (area C6).
71-90 He’s in the reading room (area C4),
91-00 He’s with Ammalia at one of the three locations
mentioned above.

CASSALANTER LORE

A successful DC 15 Intelligence (History) check reveals
the following information about Cassalanter Villa and its
inhabitants:

+ The Cassalanters fell on hard times a few years back, but
they have since reversed their fortunes and restored their
lucrative banking and money-lending business.

« Victoro and Ammalia’s eldest son disappeared three
years ago when the family was on the verge of bank-
ruptcy. They have two surviving children, young twins
named Terenzio and Elzerina.

« Lord Victoro Cassalanter is the only living heir of the late
Caladorn Cassalanter, a former Masked Lord and a hero
of the North.

« Over the years, the Cassalanters have founded a number
of philanthropic societies and made generous donations
to temples dedicated to good-aligned deities. They are
known to worship Siamorphe, a demigod whose ethos is
the nobility's right and responsibility to rule.

§ CHAPTER 6 | HELL OF A SUMMER

TERENZIO AND ELZERINA
The Cassalanter twins aren’t members of their parents’
cult and have no other friends, since they are privately
tutored and rarely allowed to leave the estate. Around
strangers, Terenzio becomes suspicious and meek,
while Elzerina seems brash and outgoing. Both chil-
dren are incredibly excited to meet friendly strangers
and treat their “new friends” to a trip around the house.
They help the characters sneak through the villa, since
the children know they aren’t supposed to have guests.
During the hours when the children are awake, their
location in the villa can be determined randomly:

d100 Terenzio and Elzerina’s Location
01-50 They're playing in their room (area C18).
51-75 They're in the library (area C3).
76-00 They're chasing butterflies in the garden (area C25).

Terenzio and Elzerina have places in the house that
their parents have forbade them from visiting—and that
they are excited to explore, now that they have friends to
accompany them. These locations are as follows:

« Their father's office {area C6)

« The attic (area C24)
- The wine cellar area (C28)

If asked about their parents, Terenzio and Elzerina
report that their parents are searching for some missing
dragons. (What their parents plan to do with a bunch of
scary, winged reptiles is beyond them, and Terenzio and
Elzerina are too scared to ask,) If befriended, they reveal
that their father keeps a journal in his office (area C6).

If asked about their older brother, Osvaldo, Terenzio
and Elzerina repeat what their parents have told them:
he's attending school in a faraway city (they don't recall
which one). Neither knows the cruel fate that has be-
fallen Osvaldo (see area C24) or suspects that a similar
fate awaits them.

HEAD SERVANTS

The head servants of Cassalanter Villa are members of
the cult. These four servants are described below. All
appear to be tieflings, though one is not. The following
changes apply to the tieflings’ stat blocks:

« The tieflings are lawful evil.

« They have these racial traits: They know the thauma-
turgy cantrip, and Charisma is their spellcasting abil-
ity for this spell. They have resistance to fire damage.
They have darkvision out to a range of 60 feet. They
speak Common and Infernal.

WILLIFORT CROWELLE

Willifort dresses in a sharp black suit and wears thin-
rimmed spectacles. He's a doppelganger that usually
takes the form of an aging male tiefling, and he greets
all guests in the entrance hall (area C1).

As the Cassalanters' chief butler and Lord Victoro's
personal attendant, Willifort Crowelle makes a point of
knowing evervthing that transpires within the villa. If
the Cassalanters have guests, he escorts them during
their entire visit, using stealth if necessary. He ushers
nosy guests away from areas or objects that might link
the Cassalanters with the Asmodeus-worshiping cult.



@@@ 18 @@@



TissiNA KHYRET

Madame Khyret is the personal attendant to Ammalia

Cassalanter and is the family’s chief housemaid.
Madame Khyret dresses in a long black gown and

wears a headdress with black tassels. She is an aging

tiefling cult fanatic, and she spends most of her time in

the master sitting room (area C19).

LaiBa “NANA” ROSSE
Laiba Rosse, better known as “Nana,” is the caretaker
and private tutor for Terenzio and Elzerina, and she
does her best to keep track of their every move. Even so,
the two often sneak away from her watchful eye.

Nana dresses in flowing red robes. She is a female
tiefling cult fanatic who relaxes in the twins' playroom
(area C17) when she’s not with the children,

JANDAR CHERGOBA
As the head chef of Cassalanter Villa, Jandar determines
each day's menu and oversees all activity in the kitchen.

Jandar is a male tiefling cult fanatic. He is often in the
kitchen (area C10).

FACING THE CASSALANTERS

Lord and Lady Cassalanter are formidable spellcast-
ers and devoted to one another. If one is assailed
within Cassalanter Villa, the other arrives as quickly
as possible.

A direct confrontation with the Cassalanters will likely
result in defeat for the characters, or—if the characters
and the Cassalanters both escape with their lives—their
arrest for assaulting nobility. The Cassalanters have no
desire to kill the characters, even in self-defense. They
take great pains to divide and subdue the party with
their magic while not inflicting grievous harm.

If the characters reduce Ammalia to 30 hit points or
fewer and Victoro is with her, he banishes her to safety
for a few brief moments while he continues fighting. If
either Victoro or Ammalia is reduced to 30 hit points or
fewer and the other Cassalanter iso't present, they try to
negotiate with or bribe their assailants.

The Cassalanters don't fear being arrested, since they
have faith that their wealth, reputations, and contacts
will keep them out of prison. They do fear the ticking
clock of Founders' Day. They plead for the characters to
allow them to carry out their plan, if only to save Teren-
zio's and Elzerina's lives.

DISRUPTING THE
CASSALANTERS' OPERATION

Killing or injuring the Cassalanters carries grave le-
gal consequences, but the characters can hinder the
Cassalanters by destroying or stealing Ammalia's stash
of midnight tears poison (area C22), destroying the
statue of Asmodeus in the temple (area A7), or keeping
Lord Neverember's gold out of their clutches,

GATHERING INFORMATION

If the Cassalanters are the main villains, the characters
might come to their villa if their search for the Stone of
Golorr or the Vault of Dragons hits a dead end. Victoro

Cassalanter keeps information related to his own search
for the stone and the Vault of Dragons in his office
(area CO).

CASSALANTER VILLA

When the characters first come near the gates of Cas-
salanter Villa, read or paraphrase the following:

" 4
Cassalanter Villa's stark white walls and gleaming crim-
son roof and turrets stand out even among the other
opulent estates of the Sea Ward, A three-story mansion
lies in the midst of picturesque green gardens dappled
with hedges and water features. The estate is surrounded
by a tall white brick wall, with a single wrought-iron gate
as an entrance. The Cassalanter family crest—a green Y
overlapping a stylized goose being fed—is emblazoned
on the pate, and armored guards stand at attention on

either side.
'] [

Cassalanter Villa is an extravagant manse with dozens
of lavish chambers for the masters of the house and
their guests—but its splendor belies the terrible secret

it holds. The temple of Siamorphe that once lay beneath
the estate has been desecrated by Victoro and Amma-
lia's devil-worship. Now, this great chapel is dedicated to
the Lord of the Nine Hells.

APPROACHING CASSALANTER VILLA

The grounds of the Cassalanters’ estate are patrolled
by hired guards. Two of them stand outside the gate of
the estate, two more stand outside the front door of the
house, and a total of six patrol the grounds at any time.
These guards are humans and are outfitted in livery that
bears the crest of House Cassalanter.

The house is surrounded by a well-manicured lawn.
A cobblestone path leads from the estate’s exterior gate
to both the front entrance (arca C1) and the entrance
to the coach house (area CH1). The villa's grounds
feature numerous deciduous trees and meticulously
tended gardens.

SPOTTED BY THE GUARDS

Characters who try to infiltrate Cassalanter Villa are

more likely ta be arrested than to be killed. The security

detail around Cassalanter Villa is meant to raise an

alarm and deter petty thieves, not to stop determined :

adventurers. If the guards spot an intruder. they do the i

sensible thing: call the authorities. ?
The City Watch has small, single-person “watch

boxes” set up on nearly every street corner in the Sea

Ward, including the intersection just outside the gates %

of Cassalanter Villa. If a guard sounds the alarm, the

Watch member on duty fetches a force of forty City

Watch veterans to cordon off the property.

REINFORCEMENTS

If the City Watch gets involved, Lord and Lady Cas-
salanter become worried that someone has caught onto
their plot. The number of guards patrolling the grounds

CHAPTER 6 | HELL OF A SUMMER 8



@@@ 19 @@@



doubles, and Victoro dispenses with all human guards
inside the house. Whenever a guard is mentioned in

an interior area, that guard is now a bearded devil dis-
guised as a human. A disguised devil looks like a mus-
cular, bearded male human in house livery. A creature
that observes one closely can, with a successful DC 15
Wisdom (Perception) check, notice its “beard” writhing.

DENIZENS OF CASSALANTER VILLA

Cassalanter Villa is home to no one but Lord and Lady
Cassalanter, their children, their personal attendants,
and their guards. All the other servants who work at the
villa live in dingy homes in the Dock Ward or the Field
Ward and travel across the city in the wee hours of the
morning to arrive before the Cassalanters awake.

With the exception of their personal attendants, the
Cassalanters replenish their servants regularly. Most
move on to other jobs, but occasionally a servant discov-
ers the secret vault (area C29), visits the forbidden attic
(area C24), or otherwise learns too much. Such folk are
fated to become sacrifices to Asmodeus.

VILLA FEATURES

The following features are found throughout the villa:

« Ceilings in rooms are 25 feet high, with 7-foot-high
corridors and doorways connecting them.

« Doors are made of exotic hardwood. If a door is
locked, the lock can be picked by a character who
makes a successful DC 15 Dexterity check using
thieves' tools, or the door can be forced open by a
character who makes a successful DC 20 Strength
(Athletics) check. Victoro, Ammalia, and the head but-
ler, Willifort, hold keys to every room in the house.

+ Floors are made of wood and covered with soft
woolen carpets. Creatures walking in carpeted rooms
have advantage on Dexterity (Stealth) checks.

- All areas are well lit by cil lamps, lanterns, or
chandeliers.

» The Cassalanters keep no silver objects (with the ex-
ception of coins) in their house, since silver is harmful
to devils.

AREAS OF THE VILLA

The following areas correspond to the labels on map
6.1. The villa connects to the temple of Asmodeus
through a secret door in area C28.

If the occupants or features of a location change
during the Founders' Day party, the text includes a
“Founders’ Day” section describing those changes.

GuUEST HOUSE

The Cassalanters host guests in this stately guest house,

CGl. Mud Room. Guests can remove and store dirty
cloaks and boots here.

CG2. Storage. Guests can store their traveling
gear here.

CG3. Dining Room. This room is furnished with two
dining tables, each surrounded by six chairs.

CG4. Kitchen. Guests are expected to dine with the
Cassalanters in the manor but can prepare their own

b breakfast here.

PCHAPTER 6 | HELL OF A SUMMER

CGS, Parlor. This room is furnished with a billiard
table, a card table, and four luxurious armchairs.

CG6. Sitting Room. This room features an upright
piano and four luxurious armchairs.

CG7. Bedrooms. Each room contains a bed for two,
a pair of wardrobes, a small vanity with matching stool,
and a storage trunk for valuables.

CGS8. Master Bedroom. This room has a balcony
and contains a large canopied bed, a standing mirror
in a gilded frame, a writing desk and matching chair,
a dresser, a tall wardrobe, and an owlbear throw rug
draped over a padded chair with matching ottoman.

CoACH HoOUSE

The Cassalanters own three carriages—one for their
banking business, one for public appearances, and one
for private use. They also own six horses: four draft
horses to pull carriages and two riding horses. The
horses are kept in stalls that are cleaned every morning
just before dawn. Tack, bridles, feed, and other necessi-
ties for the horses are stored in the coach house as well.

Cl. ENTRANCE HALL
This hall has the following features:

- A magnificent harpsichord sits in the hall.

- A crimson carpet runs down the hall toward an open
door to the foyer.

« Light from a crystal chandelier reflects off more than
three dozen holy symbols of Siamorphe perched on
wall shelves, each in the form of a silver chalice with a
golden sun etched on its outside.

If the characters are expected guests, Willifort Crow-
elle (see "Head Servants,” page 116) awaits them here
and guides them to the smoking room (area C12) to
meet with Lord Cassalanter. He allows them to explore
the house while they wait but follows them doggedly.

Founders’ Day. The hall is filled with chatty guests
holding flutes of sparkling wine. One is playing the
harpsichord.

C2. GARDEN MUDROOM
This room has the following features:

+ A guard dressed in House Cassalanter livery sits idly
on a crate, watching the outside door.

+ The floor is caked with mud. Several rows of muddy
boots and gardening gloves are strewn about the floor.

Founders’ Day. Esvele Rosznar, the Black Viper
(see appendix B), is hiding in an alcove and putting on
her Black Viper mask and hood. She is wearing a sleek
black leather suit, and a frilly ball gown lies at her feet.
Esvele has slipped away from her overbearing parents,
Rolteme and Azalea Rosznar, and is preparing to sneak
through the villa and rob the Cassalanters blind.

The characters can convince the Black Viper to help
them as they scour Cassalanter Villa by succeeding on a
DC 14 Charisma (Intimidation or Persuasion) check. If
Esvele decides to help the characters, she fights along-
side them and discovers treasure and secret doors au-
tomatically.



@@@ 20 @@@



Guest House,
Second Floor
Fjﬁil;-_:llh“ﬂ |Bll&.‘l:\.’r."l.ilfﬂ3

.

Down to

TR LT \tm»l\ltl o "ﬂ' — areaC2’2
[
§ o |
q -
% " .rl.u.t:.lll\\.\‘_-l'ﬂ\: !
ﬁ (G7 t Guest Huuse, Attlc
11 YRS - hl..j Er
Upto L

Cuach House

Cuest House,

i
3
First Floor J

If_.-rp-"‘.l I.l'!.l"h\."\-.i\‘ﬁ - I il il T RN

Upto

_@Ti{

s Upto
: area C25a ..

~Up tu'

area C‘Id g

'\'E.:\.
- '~ 4 -
Ror.. © 4“.1- l”l‘l-:. H
S "\"-. | "" : \\\ -
\ b NS h'

5{;_{_ ._T_,.;L ‘d ‘L r_
n’ ‘§# ) B
]

. "'k

* t’ @bﬁ'

Za
ETTANNN,
ﬁ o
J"’Im
> !l-

Map 6.1 CassaLanTER ViLLA

oy .

CHAPTER 6

o PN S et WSS S Y |

Main Hnuse. Garret

L --.'-ln‘lul".r.':ll'll.-‘...:l-. L

i) -"-r-f-i'-l' — T T ] — Sy

6 oo}

.

¥ L

il At

I'a||“.

[

1 Downto

—e

] 2rea C13

"Main House,
Second Floor

HELL OF A SUMMER

@@@ 1 @@@



C3. LIBRARY
This is the Cassalanters’ private library. It contains the
following features:

« The scent of old parchment hangs thick in the air.

« The walls are lined with tall shelves packed with col-
orful, leather-bound books. Each bookshelf is outhitted
with a ladder on a rolling track to enable people to
reach the highest books.

« Shelves that take up the entire southwest wall hold
not books but eighty wide-necked glass bottles filled
with swirling mist and sealed with corks.

« Hanging on the north wall between two bookshelves
is a 7-foot-tall portrait of Lord and Lady Cassalanter
holding two infant children and standing beside
their teenage son, Osvaldo. (This portrait conceals a
secret door.)

If Terenzio and Elzerina are here, they're playing on
the sliding ladders.

Books. None of the books are magical.

Jars of Mist. The glass bottles on the southwest shelf
contain magically captured sounds, including songs, op-
eras, and recorded lectures. Uncorking a bottle tempo-
rarily releases its auditory contents into the library, after
which the sound returns to its bottle. Breaking a bottle
releases the sound, but the sound dissipates after it
plays once. All the bottles are labeled. Sample contents
include the following:

« “Ahghairon’s Dragonward,” a lecture given by Khelben
Arunsun about the dragonward that protects Water-
deep (see “Ahghairon’'s Dragonward,” page 6).

. “Canticle of the Silver Chalice,” a hymn to the demi-
god Siamorphe.

» Wulfgar and the Crystal Shard, an epic opera detailing
the adventures of a barbarian, a dwarf, and a drow in
lcewind Dale.

« “Your Beardy Face,” a traditional dwarven love song
popular in the Moonsea region.

Secret Door. The Cassalanter family portrait hides
a secret door. Tilting the painting causes the door to
swing outward on hidden hinges, revealing the pantry
(area C11) beyond. A character can notice a slight gap
beneath the secret door with a successful DC 18 Wis-
dom (Perception) check.

C4. READING RooMm
This reading nook has the following features:

» Light pours into this room through four tall bay win-
dows that look out on the butterfly garden (area C25).
" « Furnishings include a luxurious armchair and a small
= side table where an empty wine glass sits atop a
small book.
A door in the northern wall has a butterfly-shaped,
stained-glass peephole.

If Victoro Cassalanter (sce appendix B) is here, he's
reading a historical text titled The Rise and Fall of Hell-
gate Keep and taking notes in his journal.

Journal. The small book on the side table is a journal
that Victoro Cassalanter uses to take notes while read-
ing. It mostly contains dry observations on atlases of

'CHAPTER 6 | HELL OF A SUMMER

Faertin and history books. A character who flips through
the journal and succeeds on a DC 15 Intelligence (Inves-
tigation) check can pick out a few notes made by Victoro
that are unrelated to his reading:

+ “Neverember's dragons are an answer to our prayers.”
« “The Cassalanter mausoleum. Inform Y. G." (The ini-
tials refer to Lady Yalah Gralhund.)

« “Golorr is an aboleth. Now it all makes sense.”

[T the characters are still searching for the Stone
of Golorr in chapter 4, you can include in this jour-
nal a clue regarding the stone’s location. (If the Cas-
salanters have the stone, it's hidden in area C6 when it’s
not in use.)

C5. FOYER

Two guards in House Cassalanter livery are stationed in
this marble-floored foyer at all hours. It has seven exits:

- A door to the entrance hall (area C1)

« An open arch that leads to a spacious dining
room (area C9)

- Three unmarked doors on the east wall (to areas C6,
C7, and C8)

» A grand staircase that ascends to the second floor
(area C13)

« An unassuming door under the stairs that leads to the
cellar (area C26)

Founders'’ Day. The foyer is filled with lavish bou-
quets in ceramic floor vases and wealthy guests chatting
loudly and drinking sparkling wine, while the gentle
music of a string quartet drifts down from upstairs.

C6. VicToro's OFFICE
The door to this room is locked. The room contains the
following features;

« Tall stacks of legal tomes and financial ledgers rest
atop a solid mahogany desk.

+ A freestanding suit of bronze armor (complete
with helm, gauntlets, and greatsword) stands just
inside the door.

If Victoro Cassalanter (see appendix B) is here, he's
seated behind the desk with fingers steepled, deep
in thought,

Armor. The suit of armor standing by the door is a
helmed horror. It obeys Victoro's commands. When
Victoro isn't present, it attacks anyone who opens the
door without a key or anyone not of Cassalanter blood
who opens Victoro's desk. The Cassalanter children
know about this construct and warn friendly charac-
ters about it.

Desk. Victoro's desk is locked and can be opened
with Victoro's golden key. A character can pick the
lock by succeeding on a DC 18 Dexterity check using
thieves' tools. The desk drawer contains thirteen sealed
scroll tubes, a signed contract inside each one. These
contracts outline the terms of loans made by Victoro
to various nobles, merchants, and guilds. The drawer
also has a secret compartment that characters can find
with a successful DC 18 Wisdom (Perception) check. It
holds a holy symbol of Asmodeus crafted from solid gold
(worth 250 gp).



@@@ 2 @@@



Stone of Golorr. If the Cassalanters have the artifact
and aren't using it, it is also hidden in the desk’s secret
compartment.

C7. CLOAKROOM

This walk-in cloakroom contains the Cassalanter fami-
ly's expensive coats and cloaks, and it also has room for
the garments of up to one hundred guests.

C8. COVvERED PORCH

This covered porch is the entryway typically used by the
Cassalanters’ servants. Ten servants (human common-
ers) eat here at mealtimes,

C9. FaAMmiLy DINING ROOM
This room holds the following noteworthy features:

« A dozen chairs surround a beautifully carved dining
table in the middle of the room.

« The tabie is set with golden plates, utensils, goblets,
and candlesticks. Silk napkins add to the display.

The Cassalanters dine here as a family, sometimes
inviting a guest or two to join them.

Founders’ Day. During the party, the dining table is
converted into a card table. Ten wealthy nobles are play-
ing a high-stakes game of Three Dragon Ante. A char-
acter can play a round by betting 5 gp and making a DC
15 Intelligence check, adding a proficiency bonus if the
character is proficient with gaming sets. On a successful
check, the character wins 10 gp. On a failed check, the
character loses the stake.

Treasure. The gold table settings and candlesticks
are worth 2,500 gp in total.

Cl0. KITCHEN

From sunrise until an hour after sundown, this kitchen
is a hive of activity:

» A half dozen chefs run to and fro, seasoning meat,
mixing batter, and otherwise preparing an impressive
variety of food.

+ A rotund, red-faced man in a tall white hat barks
orders at his underlings, brandishing a sharp knife
with every instruction.

Stairs in this room lead to the banquet kitchen on the
second floor (area C14),

The head chef, Jandar Chergoba (see “Head Servants,”
page 116), oversees six chefs (human commoners).
If Jandar believes the characters are a threat, he shouts
“For'zaal,” causing ten knives to magically rise from the
counters and attack. These knives are flying swords
that deal 4 (1d6 + 1) piercing damage on a hit.

Founders’ Day. Jandar isn't here. Instead, he's prepar-
ing Ammalia’s poisoned feast in a cooking pavilion out
on the estate’s sprawling lawn.

Cll. PANTRY
This room contains the following features:

« Casks of ale, fresh water, and cooking oil are stacked
in the middle of the room.
- Shelves of foodstuffs and ingredients line the walls.

+ The back wall of the pantry is one large wine rack that
contains a variety of splendid bottled wines. (This
wine rack conceals a secret door.)

Locked Iron Box. Jandar Chergoba, the head chef,
keeps his golden sacrificial dagger, golden mask, and
crimson robes (see “Cult of Asmodeus,” page 115)in a
locked iron box underneath a sack of potatoes. The box
can be unlocked with Jandar's golden key, or by a char-
acter who makes a successful DC 15 Dexterity check us-
ing thieves' tools. A character can also pry it open with a
successful DC 25 Strength (Athletics) check.

Secret Door. The secret door to the library (area C3)
can be detected by a character who makes a success-
ful DC 18 Wisdom (Perception) check. The character
discovers that lifting a bottle of Baldur's Gate pinot
noir from the rack unlocks the door and allows it to be
pushed open.

ClZ. SMOKING RoOM
This room contains the following features:

» One guard in House Cassalanter livery stands here,
absentmindedly examining the regal portraits that
adorn the walls and rest on fancy easels in var-
ious spots.

+ Fine armchairs arranged throughout the room smell
faintly of pipeweed; the scent is almost obscured by
incense and delicate perfume.

If Lord Cassalanter has invited the characters to
his home for any reason, he meets them here. If the
conversation turns to business, he has Willifort bring
his guests glasses of fine brandy and pipes filled
with pipeweed.

Portraits. The portraits on the walls depict several
generations of Cassalanters. The ones on the easels,
more recently painted, include the following:

« A somber young Victoro with his beaming
human father

- A wedding portrait, showing Victoro and Ammalia
smiling and carefree

+ Twelve-year-old Osvaldo holding a ceremonial rapier

« Ammalia sitting with baby Terenzio and Elzerina in
her lap while Victoro reads them a fairy tale

CI3. BALLROOM
This elegant ballroom contains the following notewor-
thy features:

« In the center stands an eerie, human-sized wood-and-
cloth mannequin with a painted face. It is dressed like
a ballroom dancer.

« The polished marble floor is a dazzling mosaic that
depicts a silver chalice with the image of a golden sun
on its outside. Characters wha succeed on a DC 10
Intelligence (Religion) check recognize it as the holy
symbol of Siamorphe, demigod of nobility.

« Gilded mirrors and handsome tapestries festoon the
walls. Along the west wall, windows with crimson
drapes stretch from the floor to the ceiling.

"
i
-

Despite its grandeur, this ballroom seems strangely
dismal without anvone dancing in it. Stairs lead down

CHAPTER 6 | HELL OF A SUMMER



@@@ 3 @@@



to the foyer (area C5) and up to a hallway outside areas
C17 and C19,

Dancing Construct. The dressed “mannequin” is a
magical construct that serves as a dance partner, It has
the statistics of a nimblewright (see appendix B) but
has no effective attacks and is worth 0 XP. When a hu-
manoid bows or curtsies before the construct, it makes
the other gesture while a magic mouth spell plays a re-
corded message in Common: “Which dance would you
like? Galliard? Pavane? Waltz?" The construct follows
its partner’s lead until the dance ends, when it becomes
still again.

Founders’ Day. During the party, dozens of wealthy
masked guests dance to a lively waltz played by a
string quartet.

Cl4. BANQUET KITCHEN

The banquet kitchen is an additional cooking space used

in conjunction with the main kitchen during social func-

tions. It is otherwise empty, and its doors are locked.
Founders’ Day. The kitchen is bustling with activity

as four chefs (human commoners) prepare an array of

pies for the noble guests.

C15. BANQUET HALL

The only piece of furniture in this expansive hall is a
long wooden dining table that happens to be a giant
mimic in disguise. It has the statistics of a normal
mimic, with these changes:

» The mimic is Large and has 75 (10d 10 + 20) hit points.

« As an action, it can make three attacks: two with its

pseudopods and one with its bite.
- It has a challenge rating of 3 (700 XP).

The mimic is well treated by the Cassalanters and
won't harm any member of the household. It obeys only
Lord and Lady Cassalanter.

Founders’ Day. The room is outhtted with dozens of
chairs, and the table is filled with food. Two dozen party
guests are gorging themselves here at any time. Four
doppelgangers from the Yawning Portal have slipped
into the party disguised as nobles. Their leader, Bonnie
(see “Familiar Faces,” page 20), poses as a minor
noblewoman going by the name Lymeria Lhaurilstar;
she was hoping to have a fun night at the party, but she's
willing to help the characters if they need aid.

Cl6. Prtano Room
A gleaming grand piano is pushed against the wall of

this dusty room. Behind it are several unmarked closets.

This room is generally empty unless a social event is
taking place or Nana Rosse is giving the Cassalanter
a8 children a piano lesson.
; Founders’ Day. Wealthy guests are chatting here and
using the powder rooms (area C16bh).

Cl6A. STORAGE CLOSET
This closet holds crates filled with winter blankets,
mops, and other household necessities.

& CHAPTER 6 | HELL OF A SUMMER

Cl68. POWDER ROOMS

These rooms are locked. They contain mirrors and are

largely unused except during social functions.
Founders’ Day. Fancy nobles are waiting in line to

freshen up,

Cl7. PLAYrOOM
This room contains the following features:

« Strewn about on the floor are giant stuffed toys, jack-
in-the-boxes, dolls, and a rocking horse shaped like
a warhorse.

+ A large mobile in the form of a butterfly hangs from
the ceiling, turning listlessly.

If she hasn't been dealt with elsewhere, the twins'
nanny, Laiba Rosse (see "Head Servants,” page 116),
sits here and crochets dolls for the children.

Cl18. Twins’' BEDROOM
The twins' bedroom contains the following features:

« Two four-poster beds take up the bulk of this room.
+ At night, the room is cluttered with dozens of toys. In
the morning, the toys are returned to their toy boxes

by a housemaid.
. A life-sized stuffed unicorn stands in one corner.

If Terenzio and Elzerina are here. Terenzio is dressed
in a crude dragon costume and is being chased around
the room by his sister, who is wearing a knight's helm
and swinging a wooden sword.

Stuffed Unicorn. This inanimate object counts as an
actual unicorn for the purpose¢ of opening the Vault of
Dragons (see “Vault Keys,” page 90).

Cl18A—-CI188B. CLOSETS
These closets are filled with stuffed animals and
spare blankets.

C19. MASTER SITTING ROOM

Lady Cassalanter's attendant, Tissina Khyret (see “Head
Servants,” page 116), spends most of her time here
when she’s not with her mistress. The room is furnished
for comfort and includes overstuffed chairs, fainting
couches, and a wine bar.

C20. LINEN CLOSET
This closet is packed with folded bedsheets and other
assorted linens. Two of the downy duvets stacked in this
room are rugs of smothering that attack any creature
that isn’t a Cassalanter or one of their servants, Any
combat in this room draws the attention of both Laiba
Rosse (area C17) and Tissina Khyret (area C19),
Lockbox. Willifort Crowelle and Tissina Khyret keep
their cult regalia (see “Cult of Asmodeus,” page 115)
in a gold-embellished lockbox hidden under a stack of
quilts bearing images of flying devils. The box can be
unlocked with either Willifort's or Tissina’s golden key,
or by a character who succeeds on a DC 14 Dexterity
check using thieves' tools. It can also be pried open with
a successful DC 16 Strength (Athletics) check.



@@@ 4 @@@



C2]. MASTER BEDROOM
The door to this room is locked. The room contains the
following noteworthy features:

» The walls are adorned with nine friezes, each one de-
picting a layer of the Nine Hells.

« A four-poster bed draped in deep red curtains and
tipped with gold spires stands before an ornate door
carved from dark hardwood with a gold latch. (This
door is locked and leads to area C22.)

A search of the room reveals a golden lockbox tucked
under the bed.

Golden Lockbox. Both Victoro and Ammalia keep
their cult regalia (see “Cult of Asmodeus,” page 115) in
a solid gold lockbox (worth 750 gp) hidden under their
bed. The box can be unlocked with either Victoro's or
Ammalia’s golden key, or by a character who makes a
successful DC 14 Dexterity check using thieves' tools,
[t can also be pried open with a successful DC 16
Strength (Athletics) check.

If the box is opened by any means other than a golden
key, poison gas sprays out from holes in the underside
of the lid, filling a 15-foot-radius sphere centered on
the box. This trap can’t be disarmed. Any creature in
its area must make a DC 13 Constitution saving throw,
taking 22 (4d10) poison damage on a failed save, or half
as much damage on a successful one. The gas dissi-
pates quickly.

C22. AMMALIA'S PRIVATE STUDY
The door to this room is locked. The room contains the
following features:

« The walls are lined with bookshelves packed with
thick tomes.

« A grimoire with a red leather cover sits on a desk
carved from dark oak.

+ A ladder leads up to a trapdoor in the ceiling.

Bookshelves. The books on the shelves include works
of fiction and nonfiction.

Desk. Aside from the grimoire (described below), the
desk holds an ornate golden candlestick (worth 125 gp),
a golden inkwell (worth 25 gp), and a feathered quill
pen (worth 15 gp). The desk drawer contains a wax seal
bearing the Cassalanter crest, Ammalia Cassalanter’s
spellbook (which contains all the spells she has pre-
pared), and ten vials of jet-black poison known as mid-
night tears (see “Poisons” in chapter 8 of the Dungeon
Master’s Guide). Ammalia plans to taint the Founders'
Day feast with the poison (see “Special Events”).

Red Grimoire, The tome on the desk, bound in ¢rim-
son leather, details a diabolical ritual that Ammalia and
Victoro enacted to first contact the archdevil Asmodeus,
Opening it reveals nothing but blank pages with a few
drops of dry blood on them. If a drop of humanoid
blood is spilled on any page, Infernal text on that page
becomes legible, remaining so until the book is closed.
The blood remains even after the text vanishes.

CHAPTER 6 | HELL OF A SUMMER



@@@ 5 @@@



Any character with the Ritual Casting feature (or the
Ritual Caster feat) who spends 24 hours reading the
book can master the ritual described within. The ritual
takes 11 minutes to cast and requires incense and a vial
of unholy water (which are consumed during the perfor-
mance of the ritual). At the end of the ritual, a proxy of
Asmodeus appears and grants its summoner the benefit
of a commune spell. The proxy is formed of incense

smoke and resembles a pit fiend. A character must finish

a long rest before performing the ritual again.
Trapdoor. The trapdoor in the ceiling is the entrance
to the attic.

C23. ATTiC LANDING

A thick scent of sulfur pervades the attic. The only illu-
mination is a beam of light that shines feebly through a
shuttered window at the west end of the room.

This attic is soundproof as long as no doors are open.
Osvaldo’s howling can be heard outside the attic only if
the trapdoor between this room and area C22 and the
door between this room and area C24 are both open at
the same time. Additionally, creatures that have telep-
athy can't communicate telepathically with creatures
outside the attic unless the doors are open.

Terenzio and Elzerina have heard howling coming
from the attic two or three times in their lives and are
curious about what lurks there.

(C24. OSVALDO'S PRISON
If Ammalia Cassalanter or Victoro Cassalanter (see
appendix B) or both are present, the door to this room

is unlocked but closed. Otherwise, it's locked shut, and
Victoro and Ammalia carry the only keys. When the
characters first open the door, read:

You are greeted with a wave of incoherent howling, as if
opening the door broke down a dam that had been hold-

ing back a madman's screams.

Osvaldo Cassalanter (see appendix B) shrieks and
moans at all hours of the day. He is trying desperately to
get someone to hear him and come to his rescue. If one
or both of his parents are here, he spits curses at them
as they weep before him.

Guarding the room are two imps in spider form. They
answer to Lord Cassalanter, and their job is to kill birds,
rats, and other vermin that find their way into the attic.
They attack anyone who tries to free Osvaldo or threat-
ens other family members present.

The Cassalanter heir apparent is a soulless abomina-
tion thanks to his parents’ thoughtless greed. His empty
shell of a body has been transformed into a chain devil
that his parents have imprisoned using his own chains.
A 10-foot-diameter pentagram has been burned into the
floor around him. A detect magic spell reveals a power-
ful aura of abjuration magic emanating from the symbol.

Osvaldo’s chains are wrapped around the beams
and timbers that frame the room. He can't damage the
house, nor can he break his own chains. He can only



@@@ 6 @@@



howl impotently at the misery being inflicted on him. He
is thoroughly insane and can't be reasoned with.

A successful DC 15 Intelligence (Arcana) check
reveals that the pentagram prevents Osvaldo from ma-
nipulating his chains, and that the effect ends if another
creature enters the area encompassed by the penta-
gram. The magic of the pentagram can also be dispelled
(DC 15). If he is freed, Osvaldo regains control of his
chains and attacks indiscriminately. If he is reduced to 0
hit points, the chain devil cries out for his mother before
melting into a pool of sickening black ichor.

C24A. ATTIC STORAGE

This room contains derelict furnishings draped in black
linens: chairs, coat racks, freestanding mirrors, dress
mannequins, and the like. These draped objects take on
a sinister countenance in the gloom but are harmless,

C25. BUTTERFLY GARDEN

In the spring, Ammalia Cassalanter's gardens attract
caterpillars, which transform into butterflies come sum-
mer. Lady Cassalanter’'s butterfly garden is the envy of
her peers. The sweet scent of lowers and herbs filters
up from the planters and rose bushes.

If Terenzio and Elzerina are here, they are frolicking
in the garden. If Ammalia Cassalanter (see appendix
B) is here, she's watching the children or tending to her
garden. Six imps in raven form hang around the butter-
flv garden and occasionally prey on Ammalia’s prized
pets when their mistress isn't looking. Despite their
insolence, Ammalia uses these imps as spies. She sends
them on missions throughout the city. They also warn
Ammalia of trespassers and attack anyone who threat-
ens a member of her family.

Founders' Day. During the party, two young, hot-
blooded nobles have accidentally offended one another.
They have changed into dueling garb and are fighting
with rapiers to resolve their differences while onlookers
drink wine and cheer them on.

C25A. GARDEN BALCONY

This balcony overlooks the grounds of the Cassalanter
estate and even offers a view of the Sea of Swords be-
yond the outer wall of the Sea Ward.

If Ammalia Cassalanter (see appendix B) is here,
she’s smoking and either staring dismally out toward
the ocean or watching her children in the garden below
(area C25).

C26. CELLAR

This cellar is kept free of dust and cobwebs by servants.
It is unsettlingly cold, no matter the time of year. It con-
tains spare furniture, a laundry tub, and trunks full of
old clothing.

C27. FALSE VAuLT

The door to this vault is made of solid iron and sports
three different locks. Victoro and Ammalia each have a
set of keys for them. Opening the door without the keys
requires a character to succeed on three consecutive
DC 20 Dexterity checks using thieves’ tools. On a failed
check, all three locks reset. The door has AC 19, a dam-
age threshold of 10, 90 hit points, and immunity to poi-

son and psychic damage. A creature can break it down
with a successful DC 27 Strength (Athletics) check,

The vault is empty.

Cold Trap. If a creature enters the vault without first
saying “Gold is my shield,” an intense blast of magical
cold fills the room. All creatures in the vault at that time
must make a DC 16 Constitution saving throw, taking
36 (8d8) cold damage on a failed save, or half as much
damage on a successful one.

A detect magic spell reveals the secret to disabling
the trap: a tiny magical glyph is inscribed in the middle
of the ceiling. If this glyph is dispelled with a success-
ful casting of dispel magic (DC 16), the trap ceases
to function.

C28. WINE CELLAR

This cellar contains the following features:

+ The east wall is lined with nearly thirty casks of wine,
« A faint draft comes from the south end of the wine
cellar. The draft betrays the location of a secret door.

The servants rarely spend much time here, since the
cellar is unlit and cold. Characters feel a strange sense
of foreboding here.

Secret Door. A faded holy symbol of Siamorphe, a
silver chalice bearing a golden sun symbol, is painted
on the south wall. If the sun symbol is pushed, the wall
grinds open, revealing area C29 beyond. A character
who searches the wall automatically detects the secret
door and can, with a successful DC 10 Wisdom (Percep-
tion) check, igure out how to open it.

C29. SECRET VAULT
Most of the Cassalanters’ wealth is tied up in invest-
ments, but the family keeps a stack of twenty 5-pound
silver trade bars (worth 25 gp each) here for emergen-
cies. At the back of the vault is a dark staircase that de-
scends 30 feet to the temple of Asmodeus (area Al).
Founders’ Day. In addition to the treasure noted
above, the vault contains five hundred sacks contain-
ing 1,000 gp each (liquidated family assets). If the
Cassalanters were successful in looting the Vault of
Dragons, the vault contains an additional five hundred
sacks (the sum total of the treasure taken from the
vault), for a total of 1,000,000 gp. The gold remains
here until it's taken down to the temple (see “Special
Events,” page 130).

TEMPLE OF ASMODEUS

Beneath Cassalanter Villa lies a secret temple where
Victoro leads a cult that worships Asmodeus. Cult
members include evil-minded nobles as well as deluded
commoners lured by the prospect of wealth and status, :
The entire cult gathers in the temple at midnight on the A4
first day of every tenday for a dark mass. During these %
ceremonies, they pledge their devotion to the Lord of e
the Nine Hells, call out the names of their enemies, and )’

i
T

beseech Asmaodeus to visit ruin upon their foes. They
afso drink wine, share gossip, and offer the occasional
sacrifice. For the Cassalanters, these events are oppor-
tunities to flaunt their power and impose their will on
their lessers.

CHAPTER & | HELL OF A SUMMER 8



@@@ 7 @@@







@@@ 8 @@@







@@@ 9 @@@



TEMPLE FEATURES

The following general features apply to the temple:

+ Rooms are dimly lit by flickering candles placed in
tall, slender, wrought-iron candlesticks,

+ Ceilings in rooms are 10 feet high unless noted
otherwise. Passages are 8 feet tall, with 7-foot-
tall doorways.

+ Doors are made of iron-banded wood.

+ Cultists who aren’t members of the nobility wear
cheap red robes, devil masks, and wooden amulets
that bear the symbol of Asmodeus.

AREAS OF THE TEMPLE

The following areas correspond to the labels on map
6.2. The temple is connected to Cassalanter Villa by a
staircase that connects with area Al, Also, an under-
ground stream (area A9) leads away from the temple's
lower level and eventually lets out in the Mud Flats
northwest of Waterdeenp.

Changes to the temple that occeur during cult gather-
ings are noted in the "Cult Gathering” sections.

Al. HALL OF THE DAMNED
The features of this hall are readily apparent:

+ In the middle of the hall, a spiral staircase descends
20 feet to the lower level (area A3).

+ The faint sound of chanting is audible coming from a
corridor to the northwest.

« To the south are three cells with iron-banded wooden
doors, A small, barred window is embedded in each
door at the height of a human'’s eye. The cell doors
face a stone pillar. Hanging from a hook on the pillar
is a ring of keys.

Cells. When the Cassalanters decide to sacrifice hu-
mans in their rituals, they lure homeless Waterdavians
to their estate and confine them in these cells. The keys
to unlock the doors hang from the stone pillar. A lock
can be picked by a character who makes a successful
DC 15 Dexterity check using thieves' tools. All three
cells are currently empty.

Chanting. The sound is that of a prayer to Asmodeus
being recited by the cultists in area A7.

A2. BALCONIES

Two crumbling balconies with stone railings overlook
the temple’s ceremonial hall (area A7), The distance to
the floor below is 20 feet.

Collapsing Floor. The balcony floors have weakened
with age. Any Medium or larger creature that steps onto
a 5-foot-square marked C on the map must make a DC
15 Dexterity saving throw as the floor crumbles and
falls away, leaving a gaping hole. On a failed save, the
creature falls 20 feet and lands prone on the floor below
(area A7) amid stone debris. On a success, the creature
avoids the fall by leaping to an adjacent, unoccupied
space. The sound of the collapsing floor can be heard
throughout the temple.

A3. ANTERIOR VESTIBULE
The spiral staircase from area Al ends at this chamber.

PCHAPTER 6 | HELL OF A SUMMER

Asmodeus Portrait. Mounted on the back wall of an
alcove to the north is an 18-foot-high, 9-foot-wide por-
trait in a gilded frame. The picture depicts a strikingly
handsome and impeccably dressed bearded man with
small horns protruding from his forehead. He carries a
ruby-tipped cane. Any character who succeeds on a DC
10 Intelligence (Religion) check recognizes the figure
as Asmodeus.

Cult Gathering. During cult gatherings, a bearded
devil guards each of the doors leading to area A7.

A4, FAMILY CrYPT

Twelve stone sarcophagi are packed into deep recesses
in the walls. The plaster lid of each sarcophagus is
carved in the likeness of a noble clutching a chalice that
bears a symbol of the sun. The sarcophagi contain noth-
ing but dust and bones.

The spirits of several dead members of the Cassa-
lanter family are bound to this crypt. They manifest as
three dark, vaporous specters plus a ghost that looks
like the insubstantial image of a handsome, clean-
shaven man of knightly bearing clad in plate armor.
These undead attack any living creatures but can't leave
the crypt or approach within 5 feet of any creature that
wears a holy symbol of Asmodeus.

The ghost is all that remains of Caladorn Cassalanter,
a former Masked Lord and hero of Waterdeep. The
ghost halts its attack and calls off the specters if a char-
acter wears or presents a holy symbol of Siamorphe.
After it is shown such a symbol, the ghost guides charac-
ters to its personal crypt (area Ada).

A4A. CALADORN'S CRYPT

A dusty stone sarcophagus occupies this crypt, its
plaster lid carved in the likeness of a handsome, clean-
shaven nobleman clutching a chalice engraved with the
symbol of the sun. The likeness resembles the ghost of
Caladorn Cassalanter (see above).

Treasure. Caladorn’s bones have turned to dust, but
his suit of +] plate armor remains, Also lying in the dust
is a mace of disruption. If Caladorn’'s ghost is present
when one or both magic items are removed from the
sarcophagus, it asks, “Do you vow to use these items
to defeat the forces of darkness?” An answer in the
affirmative is sufficient to lay the ghost to rest. Before
vanishing for good, it says, “Use the mace to destroy the
effigy of evil incarnate. End the corruption to restore my
family’s honor.” (The “effigy” is the statue of Asmodeus
in area A7.)

Ads. EMPTY CRYPT
This crypt contains nothing but dust and cobwebs.

Ab, CurLtists’ CHAMBER
This room has the following features:

+ Six wooden cots stand against the north and
south walls.

+ The west wall is carved with four bas-reliefs of
pit fiends.

Tired cultists sleep here after ceremonies, particularly if
they drank too much wine.



@@@ 10 @@@



65011004y
SaR N AREEEN

Mar 6.2: TEmPLE OF AsMODEUS

Secret Door. Behind one of the bas-reliefs is a secret
door, which can be detected with a successful DC 13
Wisdom (Perception) check. Pushing against the sculp-
ture causes a secret door to swing open into area A6,

A6. SECRET VESTRY

This room is hidden behind two secret doors that aren't
disguised on the inside, where a stone knob on each
door allows it to be pulled open with ease. The room
contains the following features:

Against the south wall stand two black wardrobes
with nine-pointed stars carved into their doors.

A pair of tall, slender mirrors are mounted on the west
wall, their stone frames carved with serpents.
Stacked in the middle of the room are six casks of
wine used for cult celebrations.

Each wardrobe contains five complete outfits of cult
regalia sized for adult humans: red robes, devil masks,
and wooden amulets shaped in the symbol of Asmodeus.

Cult Gathering. An hour before a cult gathering, five
human cultists are here donning their regalia.

A7. CEREMONIAL HALL

This hall has a 30-foot-high vaulted ceiling and a pair of
20-foot-high balconies (see area A2) overlooking it. [ts
other features as follows:

- Rows of flickering candles in iron candlesticks form a
pathway to a 30-foot-tall stone statue at the west end

A : Tt _1-'\54 | '

"

/

I
£
|

e

B =

of the hall. The statue depicts a smiling, bearded man
of diabolical bent, with small horns protruding from
his brow and cloven hooves instead of feet. At the base
of the statue, clutched in a stone claw erupting from
the floor, is a 3-foot-deep, 9-foot-diameter stone bowl
filled with crackling lames.

Three human cultists wearing red robes, devil masks,
and wooden holy symbols of Asmodeus kneel before
the statue, feverishly chanting an infernal hymn.
(During a cult gathering, the number of cultists pres-
ent increases dramatically.)

The walls around the statue are covered by large
tapestries that depict scenes of human debauchery.
(Behind the north tapestry is a rough-hewn passage
that leads to area A9.)

The Cassalanters’ ritual to save Terenzio and Elzerina
plays out here (see “Special Events,” page 130).

Cult Gathering, If the cult is here in force, thirty
human cultists stand in neat rows before the statue,
chanting to Asmodeus with wooden goblets in hand
while their leader, Victoro Cassalanter (see appendix
B), tosses offerings into the bowl. Roughly half of the
cultists are members of the nobility; the rest are Water-
davian rabble brought into the cult to fill out the ranks.
Standing around the perimeter are Willifort Crowelle,
Tissina Khyret, Laiba Rosse, and Jandar Chergoba (see
“Head Servants,” page 116). Their job is to make sure
the other cultists behave themselves while Ammalia

CHAFTER 6 | HELL OF A SUMMER



@@@ 11 @@@



Cassalanter (see appendix B) walks gracefully through
the crowd with a golden decanter, ceremonially pouring
wine into the cultists’ goblets for toasting to the Lord of
the Nine Hells. Lady Cassalanter’s six imps (see area
C25) are perched invisibly on the statue.

Devil Statue and Sacrificial Bowl. The statue once
depicted Siamorphe, but the Cassalanters used sfone
shape spells to recast it into an image of their dread
lord, Asmodeus. The massive bowl at the foot of the
statue was also fashioned with stone shape spells; it
radiates a strong aura of conjuration magic when sub-
jected to a detect magic spell or similar magic, Magical
flames erupt from the bowl as long as it remains intact.
Any creature that enters the lames or starts its turn in
them takes 4d10 fire damage. A creature reduced to 0
hit points by this damage turns to ashes. Nonmagical
objects tossed into the lames are destroyed.

If the statue is struck by a mace of disruption, it cracks
and falls to pieces, shattering the bowl as it tumbles
down. Any member of the cult who witnesses the de-
struction of the statue takes 11 (2d10) psychic damage.

Secret Door, The secret door leading to area A6 can
be found with a successful DC 13 Wisdom (Percep-
tion) check. Pushing on that section of wall causes it to
swing open.

Stream. Flowing behind the statue is a stream
that enters and exits through 1-foot-high, 2-foot-wide
arched culverts.

A8, STORAGE CLOSET
Against the back wall of this closet stands an unlocked
cabinet with a black rug laid out before it. The cabinet
contains a golden decanter (worth 125 gp) and shelves
holding wooden wine goblets.

Cult Gathering. The cabinet is empty, as the decanter
and goblets are being put to use in area A7,

A9. STREAM AND PooOL
An underground stream flows through the west side of

the tempie and into a 5-foot-deep pool here before mean-
dering northwest and emerging in the Mud Flats.

SPECIAL EVENTS

If the Cassalanters fail to obtain the Stone of Golorr, the
following events don't come to pass. As a consequence,
Terenzio and Elzerina are transformed into lemures

as their souls are forfeit ten days after Founders’

Day. Shattered by their failure and their loss, Victoro
and Ammalia Cassalanter vow to destroy those who
thwarted them.

GETTING THE GOLD

This event can occur only on Founders' Day or sooner.
Armed with the Stone of Golorr and the keys to un-
lock the Vault of Dragons, Victoro Cassalanter enters
the vault, uses a disguise self spell to appear as Lord
Dagult Neverember, and tricks Aurinax the gold dragon
into relinquishing the gold. A dozen House Cassalanter
guards disguised as members of the City Guard stuff
the gold into sacks while a dozen more haul the sacks

& CHAPTER 6 | HELL OF A SUMMER

to a pair of waiting carriages for safe transport back to
Cassalanter Villa. Each sack holds 1,000 gp, and each
carriage can hold fifty sacks (50,000 gp) at a time. Get-
ting the gold from the Vault of Dragons to Cassalanter
Villa takes ten round trips (five per carriage) and the bet-
ter part of a day. Three invisible imps accompany each
carriage, which is driven by a bearded devil wearing a
hat and a high-collared cape to conceal its true nature,
Upon arrival at Cassalanter Villa, each carriage is met
by a dozen guards in House Cassalanter livery, who un-
load the sacks of gold and place them in area C29.

DAY OF THE DAMNED

This event occurs only if the Cassalanters obtain the
gold from the Vault of Dragons.

Ammalia Cassalanter hosts a grand party on Found-
ers' Day that begins in the early afternoon and ends
at midnight. Wealthy guests begin to arrive in the late
afternoon and gather inside the villa, away from the sun
and heat, while one hundred of Waterdeep's poorest
residents—most brought from the Field Ward—gather
under pavilions set up on the lawn. Hired actors dressed
as Waterdeep's founders parade around, and bards play
lively tunes. No one suspects that the food in the pavil-
ion tents has been laced with midnight tears—a poison
that will slay the impoverished guests at the stroke of
midnight. Ammalia is immune to poison and thus par-
takes freely of the delicious food. Wealthy guests who
remain holed up in Cassalanter Villa eat and drink at
separate tables and are spared a grisly end.

An hour before midnight, the entertainers disperse as
Ammalia begins making toasts to her wealthy guests,
turning them into unwitting accomplices by virtue of
their presence and thus ensuring their silence. Mean-
while, house guards prevent any of the rabble from leav-
ing, forcibly detaining anyone who tries to flee. Unless
the characters prevent the poor folk from eating the
tainted food, those attendees consume the poison and
perish at the stroke of midnight.

While Ammalia plays host, Victoro instructs his
cultists to remove the sacks of gold from House Cas-
salanter’s vault (area C29) and hurl them into the sacrifi-
cial bowl (area A7). They finish shortly before midnight.
At the stroke of midnight, as the poison does its work,
Ammalia keeps an eye on her wealthy guests and orders
Tessina Khyret to notify Victoro that the deed is done.
Standing before the statue of Asmodeus in the temple,
Victoro summons a barbed devil and informs it that
payment has been made in full. The devil declares (in
Infernal) that the payment is “satisfactory” and informs
Victoro that the souls of Terenzio and Elzerina will not
be taken to the Nine Hells. It then disappears whence it
came, leaving the Cassalanters to bask in their triumph,

After the party, in the dark hours of morning, the
corpses of the dead are cast into the fiery bowl in area
A7, leaving no evidence of foul play. In the days and
months that follow, Victoro and Ammalia use threats
of diabolical retribution to silence witnesses and wield
their political clout to quash criminal investigations.

——



@@@ 12 @@@



,9 ARLAXLE, THE LEADER OF BREGAN D'AERTHE,
sees membership in the Lords” Alliance as
his path to power beyond Luskan. As the
secret lord of a city with an unsavory repu-
tation, he has had a hard time getting a seat
at the table with other cities of the North
when il comes to trade and defense of the
region. Thus, he plans to use the stolen gold
to bargain with Laeral Silverhand for inclusion in the
alliance, and to oust Neverwinter and its lord Dagult
Neverember—Jarlaxle's fiercest political opponent—from
the group.

FACING JARLAXLE

As the characters investigate the Sea Maidens Faire,
they could run into Jarlaxle, especially if they take a
kick-in-the-door approach and storm the vessels of the
traveling carnival. When Jarlaxle learns that the char-
acters are aboard one of his ships, he arranges to meet
with them in the guise of Zardoz Zord. If they refuse,
Jarlaxle orders his crew to cast the characters over-
board—or takes care of the job himself if he must.

If he thinks the adventurers can be trusted, Jarlaxle
proposes that they join his search for the Vault of Drag-
ons. He intends to return the gold to Laeral Silverhand,
less 5,000 gp for the characters in exchange for their
help. He offers another 5,000 gp for their help in recov-
ering the dragonstaff of Ahghairon. If the characters
accept, Jarlaxle upholds his end of the agreement. Once
the gold is secure, he gives the characters their cut.

If the characters don't agree to Jarlaxle's terms, or if
they assault him, he tries to knock them unconscious
and leave them without clothes or equipment in a gutter
in the Dock Ward. He stores their equipment in area |16
aboard the Evecatcher, with the exception of any magic
items. Those he stashes in area U4 aboard the Scarlet
Marpenoth, his secret submarine.,

In the unlikely event that Jarlaxle i1s killed, Bregan
D'aerthe raises him from the dead within a tenday. Once
he's back in action, he tries to recover any gear that was
stolen from him.

DISRUPTING JARLAXLE'S OPERATION

Characters can hinder Jarlaxle in the ways described in
the following two subsections,

DESTROY THE FIGUREHEADS

The hgureheads on Jarlaxle's ships (area |8) create illu-
sions around drow crew members, making them appear
human. It a hgurehead is destroyed, the drow on that
ship remain belowdecks to ensure that they don't draw
unwanted attention.

SINK OR STEAL A VESSEL , E
If the characters sink or steal one of his sailing ships Ve )
or the Scarlet Marpenoth, Jarlaxle tasks his crew mem- //
bers with iinding out what went wrong. In the case -5 i
of a sunken ship, such wanton destruction could also % ﬁ

involve the City Watch, especially if the act results in
people drowning.

:\_ : T

CHAPTER 7 | MAESTRO'S FALL 8}



@@@ 13 @@@



SEA MAIDENS FAIRE

Jarlaxle Baenre's seafaring carnival travels up and
down the Sword Coast in three ships. The Eyecatcher,
Jarlaxle's flagship, is ostentatious. Mounted underneath
it is the Scarlet Marpenoth, a submarine of Lantanese
design. The second ship, the Heartbreaker, is primarily
used to transport performers, strange creatures, and
wagons. The third ship, the Hellraiser, transports musi-
cians and decorative floats. The Heartbreaker and the
Hellraiser are presently docked, while the Eyecatcher is
anchored in the harbor.

All three ships are crewed by drow who are magically
disguised to appear human. Despite their disguises, the
drow still have the Sunlight Sensitivity trait.

APPROACHING THE SHIPS

The Hearthreaker and the Hellraiser are docked across
from each other at the same pier in the Dock Ward. The
characters need only walk up a ramp from the pier to
area J1 on either ship. The pier is so busy that no one
takes notice of the characters until they are on a vessel.

Jarlaxle’s flagship is anchored in Deepwater Harbor, a
mile away from his other ships. To reach the Eyecatcher,
the characters must travel there by using another vessel,
by swimming, or by flying. If the characters approach
in a vessel known to the crew, such as a rowboat from
another of Jarlaxle’s ships, the characters arouse no
suspicion until they are seen on deck. The crew of the
Eyecatcher crew sends word to Jarlaxle immediately if
the characters approach in an unknown vessel.

If the characters approach the Eyvecatcher in an un-
derwater vehicle, such as Grinda Garloth's apparatus
of Kwalish (see chapter 4), the character piloting must
succeed on a DC 12 Dexterity (Stealth) check to keep
the vehicle from being spotted by the crew of the Scarlet
Marpenaoth. If the characters approach by swimming,
each of them must succeed on a DC 10 Dexterity
(Stealth) check to avoid being spotted by the crew of the
Evecatcher.

CREWS

The characters can learn valuable information by inter-
rogating crew members and carnival performers.

SHIP CAPTAINS

Although Zardoz Zord (Jarlaxle Baenre) commands the

fleet, each ship has its own captain: a Bregan D'aerthe

drow mage disguised as a slender, well-dressed human.

These captains know of Jarlaxle's plans. They communi-
4 cate with each other and with Jarlaxle by way of sending
| spells, which they prepare instead of fly.
Velgos Ephezzrin captains the Hellraiser in the guise
of a human named Fergus Crabwater. He enjoys wine a
little too much, and characters have advantage on Cha-
. risma checks made to interact with him during a meal.
Tvlan llueph captains the Heartbreaker as a human
named Klarr Besham. He's a humorless taskmaster
whose tarantula familiar is always on his shoulder.
Llorath Pharn captains the Eyecatcher as a human
named Tarwind Arryhook. He loves games of chance
and can't resist a good wager.

CHAPTER 7 | MAESTRO'S FALL

A successful DC 15 Charisma (Deception or Persua-
sion) check and the mention of Zardoz Zord's name is
enough to gain an audience with a ship captain. If the
characters capture one of the captains and succeed on
a DC 15 Charisma (Intimidation) check, they learn the
following information by asking the right questions:

« “The Sea Maidens Faire and all its ships are under
the command of Captain Zardoz Zord of Luskan.” (A
ship captain won't divulge Zord's true identity unless
magically compelled to do so.)

« “Zord has a cabin aboard the Eyecatcher and spends a
lot of time there with Margo Verida and Khafeyta Mur-
zan, two of the Faire’s star performers.”

- “A year ago, the Sea Maidens Faire visited the island
nation of Lantan, where Zord acquired a submarine
called the Scarlet Marpenoth. The submarine is
mounted underneath the Eyecaicher.”

« “Zord has operatives searching for an artifact called
the Stone of Golorr, which leads to a place called the
Vault of Dragons.” (For security, the captains aren't
kept informed as to the mission's progress.)

+ “Zord has drow spies in Waterdeep—Fel'rekt Lafeen,
Krebbyg Masq'il'vr, and Soluun Xibrindas. All carry
Lantanese firearms.”

+ “Our disguises are powered by a magical figurehead
fixed to the fore of each ship.”

SAILORS
The Eyecatcher, the Heartbreaker, and the Hellraiser
are crewed by twenty sailors each: three drow elite
warriors (mates) and seventeen drow, all magically dis-
guised as slender humans while aboard their vessel. All
are loval members of Bregan D’aerthe, and all know that
Zardoz Zord is Jarlaxle Baenre in disguise. They know
nothing about the Scarlet Marpenoth or Jarlaxle's plans.
The crew has orders not to fraternize with strangers
or guests. Characters who question crew members can
learn the following:

. “Zardoz Zord is master of the Sea Maidens Faire. If
you want to meet him, talk to a ship captain.” (A sailor
won't divulge Zord's true identity unless magically
compelled to do so.)

« "The Sea Maidens Faire is based out of Luskan.”

CARNIES

Most of the carnival performers and workers are human
commoners trained to perform a handful of tasks or
stunts. (Performers have proficiency in the Performance
skill.) They're kept in the dark about most things, but
they're not oblivious. With a successful DC 10 Charisma
check, a character can cajole or trick a carny into reveal-
ing one of the following pieces of information:

« “Zardoz Zord uses magic to get from the Eyecatcher
to the other boats. I've never seen him in a rowboat.”

+ “The sailors communicate with each other using
odd hand signals.” (Members of Bregan D'aerthe use
Drow Sign Language.)

. “All the sailors have an aversion to sunlight.”

. “Have you noticed the sailors have the slightest hint of
an Elvish accent?”

- “All the erew members are men. Very odd.”



@@@ 14 @@@



e i il

i

. v o e
- P8 —

DISCOVERING THE DROW

Any character who spends 1 hour observing a ship's
crew can make a DC 15 Wisdom (Perception) check.
With a successful check, the character notices that most
crew members speak Common with an Elvish accent
and exchange hand signals when they think no one is
looking. A drow character recognizes the hand signals
as Drow Sign Language.

The changes wrought by the magic of the ships’ figure-
heads (see area |8) fail to hold up to physical inspection,
meaning that characters who interact with crew mem-
bers have a chance to notice the illusion. For example, a
character who grabs one of the sailors by the ear would
quickly realize by touch that the ear is pointed, not
rounded as it appears. Additionally, any drow character
who boards one of these ships instantly takes on the
illusory form of a human of the same gender, height, and
weight, because of the magic of the ship’s figurehead.

SHIP FEATURES -

Each ship has the statistics of a sailing ship (see the
Airborne and Waterborne Vehicles table in chapter 5 of
the Dungeon Master's Guide) as well as the features de-
scribed in the following subsections.

ALARMS

If intruders are detected or a fight breaks out on one
of the ships, the entire crew (one drow mage captain,
three drow elite warriors, and seventeen drow) mo-

S

LN s
=4 R PR

bilizes to combat the threat. The drow preler to take
captives or render enemies unconscious rather than kill
them. Captives are thrown in the brig (area J15) until

Jarlaxle decides what to do with them, and their gear is

stowed in the armory (area ]16).

CEILINGS
Cabins, holds, and passageways have 8-foot-high ceil-
ings with 6-foot-high doorways connecting them.

DOORS

Unless otherwise noted, doors are made of wood. A
door’s lock can be picked by a character who makes a
successful DC 15 Dexterity check using thieves’ tools,
or a door can be forced open by a character who makes
a successful DC 15 Strength (Athletics) check. A ship's
captain has keys to all locked doors aboard his vessel.

ELEVATOR PLATFORMS

Each ship is equipped with an elevator platform that can
be lowered and raised with a lever to make loading and
unloading cargo easier. When not in use, this platform
stays in the lowest cargo hold of each ship. See the de-
scriptions of the cargo holds for more information.

LLIGHTING
Areas belowdecks are brightly lit by hanging lanterns.

RIGGING
Rigging can be climbed without an ability check.

CHAPTER 7 | MAESTRO’'S FALL



@@@ 15 @@@



AREAS OF THE SHIPS

The Eyecatcher, the Heartbreaker, and the Hellraiser
have the same general configuration and occupants, cor-
responding to map 7.1. Exceptions are noted in an area's
description and on the map.

J1. MAIN DECK
Three sailors (drow) and a mate (drow elite warrior)
are on deck at all times. If the characters board the ship
and ask to speak with the captain, the mate asks their
business before even thinking about disturbing him.
Jolly Boats. Four rowboats are stacked on top of each
other on this deck. Ropes and pulleys are used to hoist
these boats in and out of the water.

J2. STORAGE
The smell of tar permeates this cluttered cabin, which
contains the following features:

« Barrels of tar are secured with nets to the starboard
wall below mounted tools.

- Against the port wall, tight rolls of white canvas are
stacked on top of each other and secured with rope.

J3. MATES’ CABIN
This cabin has the following features:

» Twin hammocks hang perpendicular to one another.
Two off-duty mates (drow elite warriors) relax in
the hammocks.

» Three walnut chests sit under the hammocks. The
chests are unlocked.

Treasure. Each chest holds two sets of common
clothes, a waterskin filled with wine, and a pouch con-
taining 3d6 gp and 4d10 sp.

J4. CrREw CABINS
Each of these cabins holds four hammocks. One off-duty
sailor (drow) rests in each cabin.

]5. GALLEY

Heat and savory scents burst from this cramped cabin,
which contains the following features:

+ A busy cook (commoner) works a frying pan with one
hand and stirs a pot with the other over a small stove.

« Dirty dishes are stacked in a washbasin.

« A table holds foods in various states of preparation.

The cook is too busy to speak with characters, and is
quick to holler in alarm if attacked, drawing the atten-
tion of the crew.

]6. PANTRY

Secured to the walls are racks of cooking ingredients,
including jars of spices, sacks of flour, and casks of lard.

]7. DiNING CABIN
* The crew dines here throughout the day. At any given
time, the cabin contains the following:

» Six sailors (drow) are enjoying a meal.
« Aboard the Heartbreaker or the Hellraiser, the sailors
are joined by 1d4 carnies (commoners).

CHAPTER 7 | MAESTRO'S FALL

« Furnishings include a table, ten stools, and two oak
cabinets containing dishes, tankards, and utensils.

J8. FORECASTLE

The forecastle is within sight of the sailors on the main
deck (area J1), the aft castle lower deck (area ]9), and the
aft castle upper deck (area J11).

Figurehead. A gilded wooden figurehead of a female
elf with flowing hair sticks out from the ship's prow,
reaching forth with both hands, Since the figurehead is
unpainted, there’s no way to tell that it depicts a drow,
but a character who inspects the figurehead closely and
succeeds on a DC 13 Wisdom (Perception) check no-
tices a tiny embossed spider on its forehead.

A detect magic spell or similar magic reveals an aura
of illusion magic around the figurehead—the effect that
makes every drow aboard the ship appear as a human.
A drow's gender, height, and weight are unchanged; the
illusion affects only appearance, not voice or manner-
isms. Casting dispel magic on a disguised drow causes
the illusion around it to wink out only for a moment. An
antimagic field suppresses the figurehead’s magic within
the field’s area. Destroying the figurehead ends the ef-
fect throughout the ship. A figurehead has AC 15, 50 hit
points, and immunity to poison and psychic damage.

]9. ArT CASTLE LOWER DECK
This deck has the following features:

. Two sailors (drow) are here at all times.
. Stairs to port and starboard climb to the aft castle up-
per deck (area J11) and the captain’'s wheel.

Anchor. The ship's anchor is accessed from this deck.
It can be raised or lowered by one creature in 10 rounds
(1 minute), by two creatures in 5 rounds, by three crea-
tures in 3 rounds, or by four creatures in 1 round.

J10. CApTAIN'S CABIN
Regardless of which ship the characters are on, this op-
ulent cabin contains the following features:

« Stylish purple drapes cover the large windows that
look out over the harbor.

« To one side of a central pillar rests a comfortable bed,
its oak headboard carved to resemble a kraken. An
oak dining table surrounded by six high-backed chairs
rests on the opposite side of the central pillar.

« Other furnishings include a glass-doored cabinet con-
taining shelves of books, a wooden trunk sealed with
a padlock, and a small writing desk.

Captain. Each ship's captain (drow mage) can usually
be found here, with a nimblewright (see appendix B)
acting as an attendant and bodyguard.

A captain is happy to meet with characters who ask
to speak with him, mostly to gauge whether they pose
a threat. If the characters are polite, the captain invites
them to join him for a meal. If the characters grow tire-
some or threatening, he commands them to leave the
ship at once, sounding an alarm if they refuse.

Fastened to each captain’s belt is a ring holding a
number of keys. One key unlocks the trunk in this cabin;
other keys unlock any locked doors on the captain’s ship.



@@@ 16 @@@



R el e '.-".r"".r;..r'ﬂ

o

4
"
i

Aft Castle

Main Deck Fore and Aft Decks

Orlop Deck

oo
- m_mr.-—w.-ﬂ-rﬁ-r' i —
= 7 ! ~ G J <o
== : e\ | = |
_,- E & | T ——— - = el e ___j
. | ?
P ¢ f =)
- — _ T |

Eyecatcher /
Lower Hold //

Upper Hold /

4 E
J 5 i
P | iy i
]
- 1 L
r | } ol g fﬁ"" o
A g P g i S e il e

Heartbreaker

Fii

i
w

e o

=1 = [

%f#}rﬁmﬁ
y

22

wrae st de i i PN

f
[

1 square = 5 feet

i
A | r
i /| [
FAF A w
]
)
F |
i
¥ s
i 1

T

a

MAR 7.1 SHIPS OF THE SeEA MAIDENS FAIRE

CHAPTER 7 | MAESTRO'S FALL



@@@ 17 @@@



Book Cabinet. Each captain keeps a modest collection
of mundane books. Each hides his spellbook in a secret
space under the bottom shelf, which can be found with
a successful DC 14 Wisdom (Perception) check. The
spellbook contains the following spells: cone of cold, con-
trol water, counterspell, detect magic, fireball, fly, greater
invisibility, ice storm, mage armor, magic missile, misty
step, Rary s telepathic bond, sending, shield, suggestion,
thunderwave, water breathing, and web.

Locked Trunk. A successful DC 20 Dexterity check
by a character using thieves' tools opens the padlock, or
it can be broken off with a successful DC 20 Strength
(Athletics) check. The trunk contains folded clothes, 250
gp in a sack, 1d6 pearls (worth 100 gp each) in a silk
pouch, a potion of water breathing, and a bottle of excel-
lent wine (worth 25 gp), bearing a label in the shape of
an eye patch and the name “One-Eved Jax” in Common.

J11. AFT CAsTLE UPPER DECK

This highest deck of the ship is within sight of the fore-
castle (area ]8), the main deck (area J1), and the aft cas-
tle lower deck (area J9). It has the following features:

« The ship's wheel stands atop the deck.
« Two sailors (drow) are stationed here at all times.

Wheel. If the ship is sailing with a full erew, a charac-
ter who has proficiency with water vehicles can stand at
the wheel and steer the vessel.

J12. Upper CARGO HoOLD
This hold contains the following features:

- Large grilled doors in the ceiling open to allow goods
to be maved to and from this hold using the cargo eleva-
tor. A 15-foot-by-10-foot section of floor opens to reveal
the lower cargo hold (area J17 aboard the Eyecatcher or
the Hellraiser; area |19 aboard the Heartbreaker).

« Crates and barrels stacked to the ceiling are tied down
to ensure that they don't move, These containers hold
food and water for the crew and the carnies,

Cargo Elevator. To activate an elevator platform, a
creature must stand on the platform and use an action
to pull a lever up or down. The platform can't be raised
higher than the main deck (area J1) or lowered deeper
than a ship’s lowest cargo hold.

The trapdoor in the floor opens when the cargo eleva-
tor is raised. If the platform is raised to area J1. the trap-
door remains open until the elevator platform returns to
this area or area J17 (J19 on the Heartbreaker).

J13. HEAD

» The reek of urine fills the cramped head. Privies—each
little more than a bench seat with a hole open to the wa-
ter below—are this room’s only features.

_+J14. GARNIES’ CABINS

~ Eight narrow cabins are fitted with hammocks, each
of which holds a resting carnival performer or worker
(commoner). Carnies call for help when they are con-
fronted by intruders and fight only in self-defense.

(CHAPTER 7 | MAESTRO'S FALL

J15. BriG

A door made of crisscrossing iron bars and fitted with
a sturdy lock seals off this cabin, whose only feature is
a chamber pot. The captain carries the key to the door.
The lock can be picked by a character who makes a suc-
cessful DC 17 Dexterity check using thieves’ tools (made
with disadvantage from inside the cell). A successful DC
23 Strength (Athletics) check forces the door open. The
door has AC 19, a damage threshold of 10, 27 hit points,
and immunity to poison and psychic damage.

Jailed Sailor. There's a 25 percent chance that a
sailor (drow) is being held in the brig after punching a
crewmate during an argument,

Jl6. ARMORY

The drow store their weapons and armor here while the
ship is at sea. If the characters are captured and stripped
of their equipment, their nonmagical belongings are
stowed here. The cabin has the following features:

« Empty weapon racks and armor hooks [ine the walls.
« Stairs lead down into the ship's belly.

Safe (Eyecatcher Only). The armory aboard the Eye-
catcher also features a 750-pound cast iron safe with a
combination lock. Jarlaxle and his lieutenants (Fel'rekt
Lafeen, Krebbyg Masq'il'yr, and Soluun Xibrindas) know
the combination: 1-20-59. A character can pick the lock
with a successful DC 25 Dexterity (Investigation) check
using thieves’ tools. Each attempt takes 1 minute. A
knock spell or similar magic also opens the safe, which
contains three pistols, twelve leather packets of smoke-
powder, three leather pouches containing twenty bullets
each, and 250 gp in a sack.

Stairs. The stairs lead to area J17 on the Eyvecatcher
or the Hellraiser, or to area J20 on the Heartbreaker.

J17. Lower CARGO HOLD
Eyvecatcher and Hellraiser only

The fantastical floats of the Sea Maidens Faire are bro-
ken down and kept in the lower cargo hold of the Hell-
raiser, while the Eyecafcher holds pieces of broken and
experimental floats. (See area J19 for a description of
the Heartbreaker's lower cargo hold.)

Cargo Elevator. If the cargo elevator platform is low-
ered to this area while creatures are in the 15-foot-by-
10-foot space where the platform lands, each of those
creatures must succeed on a DC 10 Dexterity saving
throw or take 11 (2d10) bludgeoning damage and be
knocked prone and restrained until the platform is
raised. A creature that succeeds on its saving throw
maoves to a space of its choice next to the elevator plat-
form without provoking opportunity attacks.

Hellraiser's Hold. The hold of the Hellraiser is mostly
cleared out on days when parades are scheduled, except
for empty storage trunks. On other days, it contains the
following paraphernalia:

- Various trunks filled with musician, dancer, acrobat,
and clown costumes

« Casks holding confetti, glitter, and body paint

- Bundles of wooden stilts (4 and 8 feet high)

«» Papier-méaché beholders mounted atop 10-foot poles



@@@ 18 @@@



« A float topped by a life-size mechanical unicorn ridden
by a mechanical drow ranger waving two scimitars
(when a lever under the float is pulled, the unicorn
farts a 15-foot cone of confetti, which it can do twice
before needing to be refilled)

+ A float topped with two mechanical goblins that re-
peatedly punch each other when wound up

. A float bearing a mechanical armored knight battling
a mechanical pit fiend (when wound up, the knight
cleaves with its sword while the devil flaps its wings)

« Deflated black, blue, green, red, and white dragon
balloons (they float magically when filled with air, and
their size is Huge while inflated)

- An enormous tarrasque puppet for five puppeteers

« Wagon covers decorated with tassels and painted with
colorful patterns and creatures

« Horse and ox harnesses, all brightly decorated

Eyecatcher’s Hold. The aft section of the hold of the
Eyecatcher is guarded by four giant spiders painted
in bright colors. These arachnids have been trained by
Jarlaxle since they were hatchlings, and they can pass
themselves off as inanimate float decorations by remain-
ing perfectly still until they attack. They aren't hostile
toward drow, whose true nature they sense despite the
ship's illusion magic. Characters who have a passive
Wisdom (Perception) score of 17 or higher realize that
the spiders are a threat before the creatures attack.

All sorts of damaged and unfinished attractions are
stored here, including the following:

A number of broken clockwork monsters
» Half-completed or broken wagon covers and puppets
+ A deflated balloon of an oversized flumph that has

a small gash in it (a mending cantrip can repair

the damage)
« An undecorated float, topped with an unpainted me-
chanical gold dragon made of canvas stretched over a
wooden frame

Rigged with a glass canister of flammable gas, the me-
chanical gold dragon is designed to breathe fire when a
lever is pulled. Pulling the lever cracks the canister and
sets the dragon on fire. If the fire breaks out here and
isn't extinguished promptly, it spreads to other parts of
the hold after 1 minute. Crew members in other parts of
the ship detect smoke 5 minutes later, by which time the
hold is a raging inferna. Crew members will focus on
saving the submarine (if it's still attached) before aban-
doning ship.

J18. CRAFT SUPPLIES
Eyecatcher and Hellraiser only

Each of these cabins contains materials used to deco-
rate floats:

« Glitter, feathers, fabric, paper, scissors, sewing nee-
dles, spools of colored thread, and flasks of glue are
strewn over small tables.

« Schematics for parade floats are tacked to the walls
alongside various tools.

J19. Lower CARGO HOLD
Heartbreaker only

Beastly odors fill the hold of the Heartbreaker, becom-
ing stronger as the characters get closer to the creature
pens (area J20). The hold is mostly empty on parade
days. On other days, it contains disassembled wagons
(axles, wheels, and cages) that are used to pull exotic
creatures through crowded streets. Tools needed to
assemble and repair the wagons hang from hooks on
the walls,

Cargo Elevator. If the cargo elevator platform is low-
ered to this area while creatures are in the 15-foot-by-
10-foot space where the platform lands, each of those
creatures must succeed on a DC 10 Dexterity saving
throw or take 11 (2d10) bludgeoning damage and be
knocked prone and restrained until the platform is
raised. A creature that succeeds on its saving throw
moves to a space of its choice next to the elevator plat-
form without provoking opportunity attacks.

J20. CREATURE PENS
Heartbreaker only

This section of the hold reeks of animal musk and
waste. When they're not being paraded through city
streets in cage-wagons, the monstrous attractions of
the Sea Maidens Faire growl, chortle, stamp, snort,
and roar in closed stalls. Two handlers (commoners
with proficiency in Animal Handling) walk from stall to
stall, carrying buckets of food and speaking softly to the
creatures.

Each pen is effectively a cell equipped with a slid-
ing door that can be double-latched from the outside.
A wagon assembled in area J19 can be backed up to
any pen. With the pen door open, a successful DC 15
Wisdom (Animal Handling) check then coaxes a caged
creature into the back of a wagon. This check is made
with advantage if food is given to the creature. If this
check fails by 5 or more, the creature escapes, panics,
and begins attacking indiscriminately as it tries to win
its freedom. Any such ruckus alerts the animal handlers
or other crew members if they are nearby.

The following creatures are kept in the twelve pens:

Two apes Four giant fire beetles
One rhinoceros One hippogriff

One tiger One axe beak

Omne allosaurus Two death dogs

Two panthers One giant vulture

One owlbear One polar bear

The death dogs and the giant vulture are evil, and the
giant vulture can understand Common (though it can't
speak). They seize any chance to escape and revel in the
suffering of other creatures.

J21. HANDLERS' CABIN
Heartbreaker only

This cabin contains hammocks for the two handlers
whao work in area J20. If the creatures have been taken
on parade, the handlers are asleep in their hammocks.



@@@ 19 @@@







@@@ 20 @@@


@@@ 1 @@@



J22. BEAST SUPPLIES
Heartbreaker only

Supplies and food for the creatures in area |20 are
stored here:

« Haunches of meat hanging from the ceiling give this
cabin a sickly sweet scent,

+ Shovels, ropes, chains, buckets, bales of hay, and sev-
eral large crates are pushed against the walls.

The crates hold a variety of lichens, mosses, and fungi
that are fed to the herbivorous creatures. A successful
DC 20 Intelligence (Nature) check identifies the vege-
tation as native to the Underdark, and the haunches of
animal meat as deep rothé —an ox-like creature raised
for its meat by drow in the Underdark.

J23. GUNSLINGERS' HOLD
Heartbreaker and Hellraiser only

No one is allowed down here without the captain’s per-
mission, and the guards have orders to kill trespassers
on sight. This area contains the following features:

+ Two drow gunslingers (see appendix B) stand guard
outside area J27.

« The hold is filled with barrels containing ale and
fresh water. The barrels are held down by cargo nets
hooked to the floor.

Drow Gunslingers. The drow take cover behind the
walls that divide this area as they shoot. They fight to
the death to keep intruders from reaching area J27.

J24. CLEANING SUPPLIES

These closets hold mops, brushes, buckets, and soap
used for scrubbing the decks.

J25. GUNSLINGERS' CABINS
Heartbreaker and Hellraiser only

These two cabins are the quarters of the drow gunsling-
ers in area J23. Each contains the following features:

« A hammock hangs on the wall opposite the door.
« A wooden mannequin and a walnut chest rest against
the wall by the door.

The mannequins double as armor racks, though no
armor currently adorns them.

Treasure. Each chest holds two sets of common
clothes, a water skin filled with wine, and a pouch con-
taining 3d6 gp and 4d10 sp.

J26. LOCKERS
. Heartbreaker and Hellraiser only

Lining this hall are eight closets used as storage lock-
ers by the workers and performers of the Sea Maidens
Faire. They contain traveling clothes and outerwear
hanging on hooks, as well as boots and shoes.

J27. SMOKEPOWDER STORAGE
Heartbreaker and Hellraiser only

The locked door to this forward cabin has a wooden
sign nailed to the outside that reads, in Common and El-
vish, “RESTRICTED AREA. DO NOT ENTER.” The room

_ contains the following features:

B CHAPTER 7 | MAESTRO'S FALL

+ Twenty wooden kegs are secured to the walls with
ropes. Each keg has a paper label, written on which
are the words “SMOKEPOWDER! EXPLOSIVE!” in

Common and Elvish.
+ A shelf above the kegs is lined with wooden boxes.

Boxes. Ten wooden boxes on the shelf each contain
one hundred pistol bullets.

Kegs. Each keg holds five pounds of smokepowder
(see appendix A). When one keg explodes, all other kegs
within the area of effect explode as well. If half the kegs
explode at once, the blast blows a hole in the forward
hull large enough to sink the ship. If all twenty kegs
explode at once, the blast blows half the ship to smither-
eens, shatters windows throughout the Dock Ward, and
can be heard as far away as the Field Ward.

J28. WALK-IN CLOSETS
Evecatcher only

The doors to these closets are locked from the outside,

Port Closet. This closet abuts Jarlaxle's cabin (area
J30) and contains tailored outfits and cloaks for every
season and occasion, as well as towels. Against the back
wall stands a wooden mannequin wearing an eye paich.
A secret door along one wall can be detected with a suc-
cessful DC 15 Wisdom (Perception) check.

Starboard Closet. This closet abuts the guest cabin
(area J29) and contains a half-dozen gowns and two soft
fur cloaks on hangers, ladies” hats on hooks, and fancy
towels and shoes on shelves. A secret door along one
wall can be detected with a successful DC 15 Wisdom
(Perception) check.

J29. GuesT CABIN
Eyvecatcher only

This richly appointed cabin is set aside for special
guests. It contains a large bed, a wooden chest, a free-
standing mirror, and a dresser with a lyre atop it. Empty
wine bottles roll back and forth across the floor as the
ship moves. The bed holds three giggling higures:

« Jarlaxle Baenre (see appendix B), in the guise of
Zardoz Zord (absent if he's marshalling the Day of
Wonders parade; see “Special Events,” page 145)

« Margo Verida, a female Amnian human bard (see
appendix B)

« Khafeyta Murzan, a female Mulhorandi human
swashbuckler (sece appendix B)

Margo and Khafeyta both joined the Sea Maidens
Faire within the past year—Margo as a lyrist, Khafeyta
as an acrobat, Jarlaxle has taken a romantic interest in
hoth women, who are also in love with each other.

Margo and Khafeyta are polite but terse. Both are neu-
tral good. If attacked, they grab their weapons and other
belongings and flee through a secret door (see below).

If separated from Jarlaxle and compelled to divulge
information about their host, Margo and Khafeyta reveal
some or all of the following facts:

« Zardoz Zord is a drow named Jarlaxle in disguise.

+ Each ship in the Sea Maidens Faire is crewed by
drow. The ships’ igureheads cast illusions on the
drow, making them appear human.



@@@ 2 @@@



+ Jarlaxle wants the Lords’ Alliance to recognize his
city, Luskan, as a new member, and he wants to push
Neverwinter out of the alliance.

» A year ago, the Sea Maidens Faire visited the island
nation of Lantan, where Jarlaxle obtained a Lantanese
submarine and several clockwork servants.

Secref Door. A secret door leading to a walk-in closet
(area ]J28) can be found with a successful DC 15 Wis-
dom (Perception) check.

Treasure. Margo's lyre is worth 30 gp. An unlocked
chest at the foot of the bed holds four sets of costume
clothing and a jewelry box containing six gold bracelets
(worth 25 gp each), two diamond rings (worth 250 gp
each), and a pearl necklace (worth 500 gp).

J]30. ZArRDOZ ZORD'S CABIN
Eyecatcher only

The doors to this cabin are locked. If anyone other than
Jarlaxle turns the handle of either door, a magic mouth
spell activates and shouts, “By Lolth’s teeth, have you no
manners?” The sound is loud enough to be heard by Jar-
laxle (if he is in area J29), and he comes to investigate.
The room contains the following features:

- The sweet smell of lavender permeates the cabin. (The
scent is created by magic and can be dispelled.)

« A mimblewright (see appendix B) stands in a small al-
cove next to a chess table. An empty wine bottle on the
table is labeled “One-Eyed Jax"” in Common.

» Behind a purple curtain, a bed is covered by a soft
blue blanket and matching pillows. Next to the bed is
a wooden chest with clawed feet.

Nimblewright. The nimblewright serves Jarlaxle as
a servant, and it obeys its master's commands without
question. Absent orders, it attacks anyvone who discovers
the trapdoor in the floor (see below).

Secret Doors. Any character who searches the cabin
and succeeds on a DC 15 Wisdom (Perception) check
finds a secret door leading to a walk-in closet (area J28)
and a secret trapdoor in the floor.

The trapdoor has an arcane lock spell cast on it, but
rapping on it three times suppresses the spell for 1 min-
ute. Alternatively, the trapdoor can be forced open with
a successful DC 25 Strength (Athletics) check.

Below the trapdoor, a metal ladder descends to the
bottom of a 10-foot-long, 3-foot-diameter steel tube
with a circular metal hatch at the bottom. The hatch is
opened by turning its valve wheel, which grants access
to area Ul on the Scarlet Marpenoth. This area is magi-
cally pressurized to keep water from entering the ship if
the hatch is opened while the submarine isn't docked.

Treasure. The chess set features jade pieces shaped
like drow and is worth 2,500 gp.

J31. TRAINING AREA
Eyecatcher only

Jarlaxle trains here regularly. The space contains the
following features:

« Ropes are strung throughout the area like webs,
« Four rapiers hang from a woaoden rack attached
to the mast.

- Five beat-up mannequins made of wood, straw, and
canvas stand about the room. Each holds a wooden
sword and a wooden shield.

+ A dartboard mounted on one wall has a shiny dagger
sticking into it.

Attack Mannequins. As a bonus action, jariaxie can
command the five magic mannequins to animate and
attack a single target of his choice. Each mannequin has
the statistics of animated armor. Mannequins that take
damage become inanimate until Jarlaxle uses another
bonus action to reanimate them. A mannequin targeted
by a mending cantrip regains 1 hit point.

Dagger. The dagger in the dartboard is a +I dagger.

Rapes. The ropes make all parts of this area difficult
terrain. As part of its movement, a creature can maneu-
ver around the ropes with a successful DC 15 Dexterity
(Acrobatics) check, negating the ropes’ effect for that
creature until the end of its turn.

J32. JARLAXLE'S SAUNA
Eyecatcher only

The door to this room is closed with an exterior hook
latch. When the door is opened, clouds of steam bil-
low out from the area beyond. This steam is created
magically and can be dispelled with a successful cast-
ing of dispel magic (DC 14). The room holds only a
woaoden bench.

Steam. The steam has no adverse effect for the first
hour. For each additional hour spent in this room, a
creature must succeed on a DC 11 Constitution saving
throw or gain one level of exhaustion. Creatures im-
mune to fire damage automatically succeed on this save.

SCARLET MARPENOTH

Jarlaxle's submarine, the Scarlet Marpenoth, is mounted
underneath the Eyecatcher and can be seen only by
creatures under the water. Jarlaxle retreats here if the
Eyecatcher comes under attack.

Drow CREW

The magic that conceals the true appearance of drow
aboard Jarlaxle's ships doesn't extend to the Scarlet
Marpenoth. Characters who encounter drow while
sneaking around the submarine are questioned. If the
drow don't get the answers they want, they attack. Any
nearby drow who hear a fight break out will investigate
and team up to repel boarders.

GNOME ENGINEERS Sh ot

Rock gnome engineers maintain and operate the Scarfet
Marpenoth. These gnomes are apprentice wizards (see
appendix B), with these changes:

« The gnomes are neutral good. ‘{n i
« They are Small and have 7 (2d6) hit points each,

‘-: :l'
« They have these racial traits: They have advantage on 'ﬁi

afl Inteffigence, Wisdom, and Charisma saving throws

against magic. Their walking speed is 25 feet. They s 1
have darkvision out to a range of 60 feet. They speak = Y
Common and Gnomish.

CHAPTER 7 | MAESTRO'S FALL



@@@ 3 @@@



1 square = 5 feet

1 \. =
Ig_ll?l gl o UTB o }
Ladd:r L:dder Ladﬂd‘ei' ll.aaaelr
8 o us [l (| us
| U8 Us
AlR|lA
<[ 19 |»
. U3 U4 g T
r |\ %
i Hatch to “]2
. - ower 10 Ladd
3 U1 2L Jower deck uti U Ihi%tﬂ
S e

Upper Deck e

MaP 7.2: ScARLET MARPENOTH

The gnomes know a great deal about submarines and
very little about everything else. They are treated well
by Jarlaxle, but a successful DC 15 Charisma (Intimi-
dation) check or a bribe of 100 gp or more can convince
a gnome to surrender its master keys, tamper with the
engine, or pilot the submarine as the characters direct.

SUBMARINE FEATURES

The Scarlet Marpenoth has AC 20, 300 hit points, a
damage threshold of 15, and immunity to poison and
psychic damage. The submarine’s structural integrity
fails when the vessel drops to O hit points, whereupon
it loods and sinks. The submarine is worth 15,000 gp
intact and requires at least one pilot and one engineer
to operate. It has a maximum speed of 2 miles per hour
and can hold up to 10 passengers plus 2 tons of cargo.
The submarine has the following general features:

« Interior spaces are unlit. (The drow and the gnomes
rely on darkvision to see.)

+ All furnishings and features are bolted down.

» Chambers are 8 feet high, with 6-foot-high passages
and doorways connecting them.
 Air magically circulates through a complex ventilation

, system and small metal grills set into the floors.

« Doors are made of steel and have AC 19, 27 hit points,
a damage threshold of 10, and immunity to poison and
psychic damage. A door’s lock can be picked by a char-
acter who makes a successful DC 18 Dexterity check
using thieves' tools. A door can be forced open by a
character who succeeds on a DC 25 Strength (Athlet-

CHAFTER 7 | MAESTRO'S FALL

Lower Deck

— - - —_——

ics) check. Jarlaxle and the gnomes aboard the Scarlet
Marpenoth have keys to all locked doors. All doors are

airtight while closed.

AREAS OF THE SCARLET MARPENOTH

The following locations are keyed to map 7.2.

Ul. ENTRANCE HATCH

Characters descending from Zardoz Zord's cabin on the
Eyecatcher (area |30) arrive in this chamber. From this
side, the circular metal hatch is opened by turning its
valve wheel. This area is magically pressurized to keep
water from entering the Scarlet Marpenoth if the hatch
is opened while the submarine isn't docked to the Eye-
catcher. But if both the outer hatch and the inner door
are opened underwater, the submarine will flood.

U2. ENGINE RooM

The door to this area is locked. A plaque on the door
reads “ENGINE ROOM" in Common and Gnomish. The
room has the following features:

« The engine room is filled with machines that hiss,
whir, and clatter constantly. A rock gnome named
Breena Bafflestone monitors the machinery at all
times. Nearby is a copper speaking tube, which en-
ables her to communicate with the control room com-
mand center (area U7b).

« Drawers in the walls contain screwdrivers, wrenches,
and other tools.



@@@ 4 @@@



+ To port and starboard, 3-foot-high, 2Y2-foot-wide
passageways lead deeper into the machinery. Me.-
dium creatures must squeeze to move through
these passages.

Machinery. The engine is a quasi-magical machine
that controls the submarine’s propulsion and depth and
powers the fins and rudder that control direction. A
detect magic spell or similar magic reveals an aura of
transmutation magic throughout the area.

A character who has proficiency with tinker's tools
can use the tools to disable the engine with a successful
DC 15 Intelligence check. The same check reactivates
the disabled engine. Whether it succeeds or fails, each
check represents 10 minutes of work. The engine can
also be destroyed. It has AC 16, 50 hit points, and immu-
nity to poison and psychic damage.

U3. SOLUUN'S STATEROOM
If he has not been encountered and disposed of else-

where, a drow gunslinger named Soluun Xibrindas (see

appendix B) is here, worshiping before a shrine of Lolth,
His stateroom has the following features:

» The port alcove contains a net hammock and a steel
footlocker.

« A black metal shrine of Lolth covered in tiny spider
statuettes stands against one wall, At its top is a sculp-
ture of the demon goddess, with the head and upper
body of a female drow and the lower body of a spider.

+ A Lantanese diving suit hangs in the closet to
the south.

Diving Suit. This experimental device consists of a
pressure-resistant padded suit, made of canvas with
iron fittings and iron gauntlets. A fishbowl helmet at-
taches to the suit’s collar and functions as a cap of water
breathing.

Treasure. The shrine weighs 50 pounds and is worth
125 gp as an art object. The footlocker contains a pouch
holding 50 gp and a potion of healing. The potion’s crys-
tal flask, shaped like a spider, is worth 25 gp.

U4. JARLAXLE'S STATEROOM
The door to this tidy cabin is locked. The cabin contains
the following features:

« The scent of lavender magically permeates the cabin.
(The scent is created by magic and can be dispelled.)

« A hammock is suspended in the starboard alcove. A
detect magic spell or similar magic reveals that the
wall behind the hammock radiates an aura of trans-
mutation magic.

« Other furnishings include a tall harp with a stool
nearby, a harpsichord with a matching bench, a free-
standing mirror, and a large wooden trunk.

Closet. The locked closet aft of the cabin contains a
wootlen rack stocked with sixty bottles of wine. Each
one is a rare vintage warth 25 gp.

Magic Window. Touching the wall behind the ham-
mock renders the wall transparent from this side, and
touching it again makes this “window” go away. When
the wall is transparent, creatures in the cabin can see
out, but creatures outside the submarine can't see in.

Wooden Trunk. The trunk isn't locked. Lifting the lid
causes panels in the front and sides to open, releasing a
swarm of mechanical spiders that attacks anyone other
than Jarlaxle. This swarm has the statistics of a swarm
of insects (spiders), with these changes:

« The swarm is made up of Tiny constructs.

» It doesn’t require air, food, drink, or sleep.

+ The swarm has vulnerability to lightning damage,
is immune to exhaustion, and can't be charmed,
frightened, paralyzed, petrified, knocked prone,
or poisoned.

The chest has a secret compartment in the bottom
that can be detected and opened with a successful DC
13 Wisdom (Perception) check. If Jarlaxle has the Stone
of Golorr. he keeps it in the secret compartment, along
with any magic items he might have claimed from the
characters, The compartment is otherwise empty,

U5. FEL'REKT'S STATEROOM
If he has not been encountered and defeated elsewhere,
a drow gunslinger named Fel'rekt Lafeen (see appendix
B) is here, cleaning his pistol. His stateroom contains a
net hammock and a steel footlocker.

Treasure. Fel'rekt's footlocker contains 65 gpin a
pouch, a comb carved from dragon bone (worth 5 gp),
and a pair of obsidian dice (worth 25 gp).

U6. KREBBYG'S STATEROOM

If he has not been encountered and defeated elsewhere,
a drow gunslinger named Krebbyg Masq'il'yr (see ap-
pendix B) is here, sharpening his sword. His stateroom
contains a net hammock and nothing else.

U7. CoONTROL ROOM

The control room has two levels: an observation deck
(U7a) and a command center (U7h), with two ladders
running between levels. Two circular soundproof
windows are embedded in the port and starboard
bulkheads. The window panes are made of glassteel, a
resilient metal magically rendered transparent. Curious
merfolk who live in Deepwater Harbor investigate the
submarine from time to time, and might be seen peering
through the windows.

U7a. Observation Deck. |f Jarlaxle Baenre (sce
appendix B) is forced to retreat to the submarine, he is
here when the characters first arrive. The observation
deck is an elevated, 10-foot-high metal platform with
a grilled floor, supported by two metal columns. Two
padded swivel chairs are bolted to the deck, which is
enclosed by a thin steel railing. The height of each chair
can be adjusted ta accommodate a Small or Medium
creature. Between the two chairs is a bronze periscope
that can be raised or lowered whenever the submarine
is detached from the Evecatcher.

U7b. Command Center. Three rock gnome engineers ). F

named Lorella Middenpump, Tervaround Waggletop, r':;)

and Anverth Leffery are on duty here, along with two

drow elite warriors named Karabal L'enz and Marro

Qaz'arrt. The drow guard the control room and keep the o ‘
gnomes on task. -

Lorella sits in the pilot's swivel chair, which is
bolted to the floor and can be lowered ar raised to

CHAPTER 7 | MAESTRO®S FALL



@@@ 5 @@@



accommodate a Small or Medium creature. The chair is
situated before a panel of dials, levers, and buttons. Ter-
varound and Anverth stand by the back wall, monitoring
gauges and performing system checks. A copper speak-
ing tube enables them to communicate with Breena
Bafflestone in the engine room (area U2).

The gnomes can pilot the Scarlet Marpenoth with-
out needing to make a check. Any other creature must
succeed on a DC 20 Intelligence check to figure out the
controls. From the control panel, the pilot can detach
the submarine from the Eyecatcher, as well as control
its speed, direction, and depth. The pilot can electrify
the outer hull for 1 minute, after which the system re-
quires 1 hour to recharge. Any creature that comes into
contact with or starts its turn in contact with the outer
hull when it’s electrified must make a DC 15 Dexterity
check, taking 22 (4d10) lightning damage on a failed
save, or half as much damage on a successful one. A
creature wearing metal armor has disadvantage on this
saving throw.

U8. ENGINEERS' STATEROOMS
Each of these four compartments contains an off-duty
rock gnome engineer sleeping in a small hammock,
beneath which are two steel footlockers. The four rock
gnomes are named Cockaby Fapplestamp, Ellywick
Fiddlefen, Gerbo Reese, and Zaffrab Horcusporcus.
Footlockers. Each footlocker belongs to a partic-
ular gnome engineer stationed aboard the Scarlet
Marpenoth. Both contain folded clothes sized for a

CHAPTER 7 | MAESTRO'S FALI

gnome. One of them also holds a set of grease-stained
overalls and a set of tinker’s tools that belong to the
gnome asleep in the bunk. There is a 25 percent chance
that a footlocker also contains a clockwork toy, a fire
starter, or a music box (as described in the “Rock
Gnome" section in chapter 2 of the Player's Handbook).

U9, DiNING ROOM
This room has the following features:

« A walnut dining table is surrounded by eight padded
swivel chairs. The height of each chair can be adjusted
to accommodate a Small or Medium creature.

« Soft, ambient music fills the room, created by magic.

Ul0. GALLEY

This room has the following features:

« An iron stove sits in one corner.

. In the opposite corner stands a steel food preparation
table with utensils dangling above it. Built into the ta-
ble is a lidded steel box attached to a pedal on the floor
below, When the pedal is pumped, water and moving
brushes scrub dishes and utensils that have been
placed into the box.

« A cart holds cutlery and dishes.

Ull. PANTRY

Metal shelves lining the walls hold fresh fruit, vegeta-
bles, casks of wine, and meat. Two steel barrels (one
containing ale, the other drinking water) stand beneath
the shelves.



@@@ 6 @@@



Ul2. PrivY

This privy has a toilet and a washbasin, both attached to
pipes. Above the basin is a hinged mirror, behind which
is a compartment containing soap and towels.

Ul3. AIR SYSTEM

The door to this area is locked. A plaque on this door
reads “AIR SYSTEM" in Common and Gnomish. The
room has the following features:

« The area is filled with machines that hiss, whir, and
clatter constantly.

« Drawers in the walls contain screwdrivers, wrenches,
and other tools.

« To port and starboard, 3-foot-high, 2%2-foot-wide pas-
sageways lead deeper into the machinery. Creatures
that are Medium or larger must squeeze to move
through these passages.

Machinery. The quasi-magical machinery in this area
generates and circulates fresh air throughout the sub-
marine. A detect magic spell or similar magic reveals an
aura of conjuration magic throughout the area.

A character who has proficiency with tinker’s tools can
use them to disable the machinery with a successful DC
15 Intelligence check. The same check reactivates the
disabled machinery. Whether it succeeds or fails, each
check represents 10 minutes of work. The machinery
can also be destroyed. It has AC 16, 50 hit points, and
immunity to poison and psychic damage.

When this machinery shuts down, air stops pumping
throughout the vessel. Unless the air system is reacti-
vated, creatures trapped in the submarine that need oxy-
gen to breathe will begin to suffocate after two days (see
“Suffocating” in chapter 8 of the Player’s Handbook).

SPECIAL EVENTS

You can use one or more of the following events if the
characters take an interest in the Sea Maidens Faire.

THE FRIENDLY DRACON

This encounter can be used as the characters approach
the Eyecatcher. Read:

' .
In the water ahead, a large shape speeds toward you.
As it gets closer, you recognize it as a dragon with
bronze-colored scales. Slewing to a stop, the creature
gives a toothy grin, then raises a claw in a small wave.
“Well met!” it chirps.

| :

Zelifarn, a young bronze dragon, recently moved

into Deepwater Harbor. He has spent the past several
months scouring wrecks at the bottom of the harbor

for treasure and stashing precious baubles in a hidden
underwater cave. Recently, he noticed a strange craft
mounted on the underside of the Eyecatcher. His at-
tempts to treat with the crew have met with no success,
but he's curious to know more. Since the characters
appear to be headed toward a rendezvous with the Eye-
catcher, Zelifarn would like them to find out all they can

about the underwater vessel without raising suspicion.
The dragon promises to meet them again after they have
completed their mission. In exchange for information,
he offers to give the party a barnacle-covered chest that
he found recently. He hasn’t opened it yet, so its contents
are unknown to him, but he can smell gold inside.

TREASURE
Zelifarn approaches the characters again as they leave
the Eyecatcher. If they tell him more about the contents
of the submarine and he believes that they're being
truthful, he gives them the promised reward: an old
chest with a rusted lock that can be busted or pried open
with a successful DC 13 Strength (Athletics) check. It
contains 300 sp plus a golden amulet shaped like an oc-
topus with amethyst eyes (worth 250 gp).

A secret compartment in the chest's lid can be found
with a successful DC 11 Wisdom (Perception) check.
It contains a stoppered wooden scroll tube that holds a
spell seroll of revivify.

A NIGHT TO REMEMBER

If the characters stake out the ships of the Sea Maidens
Faire, they observe strange activity on the pier during
their first night of surveillance:

T L ]
A thick fog unexpectedly rises along the water, engulfing
vessels and docks alike. As the gray miasma thickens, the
creaking sound of shifting ships becomes increasingly
haunting. Suddenly, you spot three shadows gliding
through the gloom like elves slipping through a forest.
Where they came from and where they're going, you
don’t know.

. L]

The shadowy figures are the three drow gunslingers
Fel'rekt Lafeen, Krebbyg Masq'il'yr, and Soluun Xibrin-
das (see appendix B). If any of these drow are dead or
otherwise indisposed, replace them with drow elite
warriors. The drow used the cover of the fog to come
ashore in one of the Eyecatcher’s rowboats. The boat is
tied off at the end of the pier between the Heartbreaker
and the Hellraiser.

These Bregan D’aerthe spies are on their way to a
secret meeting with Laeral Silverhand (see appendix
B). The Open Lord is waiting for them in an alley in the
Dock Ward, under the cloak of an invisibility spell. She
remains invisible for the entire meeting.

Harper spies in Luskan recently warned Laeral that
Jarlaxle might be in Waterdeep. She reached out to him
with a sending spell to arrange this meeting, in the hope _
of finding out his plans. The characters can follow the o
drow spies to the rendezvous. If the drow realize they're |
being followed, they make no effort to shake their pursu- ¥ f
ers, If they're attacked, they scatter and try to complete 6)

/ ;-.-,:

their mission before heading back to the Eyecatcher.

If a battle erupts and escape appears impossible, the
drow fight to the death. A City Watch patrol consisting of
six veterans arrives 1d4 minutes later to make arrests.

CHAFTER 7 | MAESTRO'S FALL



@@@ 7 @@@



JARLAXLE'S LETTER

One of the Bregan D’aerthe spies carries a letter for
Laeral. It bears the wax seal of Luskan and is written in
Jarlaxle's elegant hand, in Elvish. It reads as follows:

[ [

To Her Ageless Majesty, Laeral Silverhand, the Witch-
Queen of Stornanter, Lady of the North, She of the Seven
Sisters, Chosen of Mystra, and Open Lord of Waterdeep:

Your spies are to be commended! Rest assured, my
presence in your fair city is purely recreational—though if
fortune smiles upon me, this visit could benefit us both.

Your predecessor left the City of Splendors in a sorry
state, but you have done wonders to lift the spirit of the
citizenry during your short time in office. | know how
politics offends you, so forgive me for taking this oppor-
tunity to point out the obvious. We can make both our
cities stronger and strike back at he who robbed Waterda-
vians of their wealth and dignity. I'm speaking, of course,
of that dirty sack of rats, Dagult Neverember. That's the
‘phrase you used to describe him yesterday to the emis-
sary from Mirabar, is it not? Evidently, my spies are also
to be commended!
J Why let Neverember get away with his crimes against
Luskan and Waterdeep? Can we be allies, if not friends?
These are the questions that haunt my dreams, as surely
as | haunt yours.

Sincerely,

J

Laeral isn't surprised that Jarlaxle lacks the courage to
meet her in person. She thanks the drow messengers
for delivering the letter, cautions them to mind the City
Watch and the City Guard, and heads back to the Palace
of Waterdeep. The drow spies return whence they came.

CONVERSATION WITH LAERAL

If Laeral becomes aware of the characters, she appears
before them and asks what business they have with Bre-
gan D'aerthe. If the characters have not met the Open
Lord before, she might impress them with her plain-
spoken manner and lack of pretense. Alone and outside
the political maelstrom, she acts more like an adven-
turer than a city official.

If the characters inquire about the letter, she shows it
o them and asks their opinions on Luskan's joining the
Lords’ Alliance. In her mind, Luskan is a greedy pirate
state that can't be trusted under any circumstances. If
the characters feel similarly, she trusts them enough to
ask for their help in finding and securing Lord Neverem-
ber’s hidden cache of dragons. In exchange, she prom-
ises them a 5,000 gp reward and Waterdeep's gratitude.

DAYy OF WONDERS PARADE

The Day of Wonders is the grandest parade of the fall
season, and Jarlaxle wants the Sea Maidens Faire to

% bea part of it. In the guise of Zardoz Zord, he pays a

visit the day before the holiday to the House of Inspired
Hands, Waterdeep's temple of Gond, to coordinate with
the acolytes in charge of organizing the parade. He pre-
sents a detailed plan that commingles the attractions of
the Sea Maidens Faire with the bizarre inventions of the
temple—a plan that is well received.

The evening before the Day of Wonders, workers be-
gin assembling the wagons and floats of the Sea Maid-
ens Faire on the pier. Early the following morning, the
docks are a hive of activity as performers practice their
routines and caged creatures are offloaded one by one.
An hour before highsun on this crisp and windy autumn
day, the Sea Maidens Faire makes its way to the House
of Inspired Hands to meet up with the Gond worshipers
and their contraptions. From there, the parade strikes
out in earnest, marching through Waterdeep's streets
to the cheers of the local folk. Zardoz Zord serves as
grand marshal, leading the parade on the back of a rain-
bow-feathered diatryma summoned using his feather of
diatryma summoning (see appendix A). For Jarlaxle, the
parade is a chance to show off and be cheered; he has no
ulterior motive for participating in the event.

WHILE THE BOSS Is AwAy

As the Sea Maidens Faire parades through Waterdeep,
the characters can slip aboard one or more of Jarlaxle’s
ships. If things turns violent aboard a ship, its captain
uses a sending spell to contact Jarlaxle. Jarlaxle is
supremely confident that his crews can overcome any
threat, so he doesn't rush to their defense at the first
sign of trouble. Only if the characters do considerable
damage will he treat their attack as a setback.

If the characters escape a confrontation on the ships
but leave behind witnesses who can identify them, it
takes Bregan D'aerthe several days to track them down
(assuming Jarlaxle hasn't already met them). Although
killing the characters would be easy at that point, Jar-
laxle would rather put them to work for him. He has
them watched but doesn't provoke hostilities until such
time as the reward clearly outweighs the risks.

ESCAPED BEAR

The Sea Maidens Faire parade ends where it started—at
the docks. As the attractions are being loaded back onto
their ships, the Faire's polar bear gets loose, flecing into
the Dock Ward before its handlers can corner it. News
of the escaped bear spreads quickly, and sightings are
frequent. If the characters impressed one of the drow
ship captains, he contacts them by way of a sending
spell and asks for help. He wants the bear retrieved be-
fore the City Guard finds and Kkills it, offering a reward
of either 250 gp or a potion of water breathing.

The characters can track and corner the polar bear
with a successful DC 16 Intelligence (Investigation) or
Wisdom (Survival) check. Whether a check succeeds or
fails, each attempt represents 1 hour of searching. If the
characters find the bear within 4 hours, it can be lured
back to the Sea Maidens Faire with food or a successful
DC 14 Wisdom (Animal Handling) check. The captain
then makes good on the promised reward. If the charac-
ters don't find the bear, members of the City Guard get
to it first and kill it.



@@@ 8 @@@



b

— L . <

.

.

CHAPTER 8: WINTER WIZARDRY

/

r— =3 % — 1

ANSHOON YEARNS TO RULE WATERDEEP
as a tyrant, take over the Zhentarim,
and use both seats of power to plunder
and control the Sword Coast. He needs
the gold in the Vault of Dragons to pay
off Masked Lords and Zhentarim lead-
- ers whose support will be instrumental
when the time comes to oust Lady Laeral Silverhand as
Open Lord. Manshoon has a long list of powerful ene-
mies, among them the Harpers, Elminster of Shadow-
dale, Halaster Blackcloak of Undermountain, and the
Blackstaff of Waterdeep. These enemies would quickly
move against Manshoon if they learned he was hiding

in Waterdeep. For his evil plans o succeed, Manshoon
must operate in the shadows for the time being.

FACING MANSHOON

A head-on battle with Manshoon isn’t likely to go well for
the characters. That said, the wizard's greatest weak-
ness is that he has powerful enemies in Waterdeep. The
risk of exposure keeps him hidden, and the characters
can thwart him by furnishing his enemies with proof
that he's alive (after a fashion) and operating in Water-
deep. When it comes to Manshoon clones, deciding to
"let the city deal with it" is a wise course of action.

If the characters find themselves at the evil wizard’s
mercy, Manshoon will gladly trade their pitiful lives for
the Stone of Golorr and the keys to unlock the Vault of
Dragons. In exchange for helping him get the gold, he

promises the characters 10 percent of the trove (50,000
gp). Manshoon has no intention of honoring this agree-
ment, but it can help buy the characters some time.

If the characters manage to kill Manshoon and the
local authorities are made aware of the act, no murder
charges are liled. Rather, the characters’ actions are cel-
ebrated. Laeral Silverhand summons them to the Palace
of Waterdeep to thank them officially, in her capacity as
Open Lord. Sometime later, Vajra Safahr invites them
to Blackstaff Tower to thank them for their service and
offer them membership in Force Grey,

DISRUPTING MANSHOON'S
OPERATION

Characters can hinder Manshoon in the following ways.

RELEASE THE BARLGURA

If the characters free the barlgura demon in area K15
and allow it to roam Kolat Towers, Manshoon loses
many followers to the demon’s rampage.

REPORT MANSHOON

Delivering proof that Manshoon is hiding in Waterdeep
to Laeral Silverhand, Mirt, the Harpers, Force Grey, the
Blackstaff, the Lords’ Alliance, the Order of the Gaunt-
let, the City Watch, or the Watchful Order of Magists
and Protectors triggers a far-reaching effort to oust

him from the city. Such proof can be obtained from any
of Manshoon’s lieutenants, who can be captured and

CHAPTER 8 | WINTER WIZARDRY "



@@@ 9 @@@



, si 2]

—F -

-
turned over for interrogation. These lieutenants include
Sidra Romeir (area K2), Manafret Cherryport (area K3),
Urstul Floxin (area E5), Vevette Blackwater and Agorn
Fuoco (area ES8), and Havia Quickknife and Mookie
Plush (area E10).

The ledger in area E13 also contains proof of Man-
shoon’'s malfeasance. Giving it to Laeral Silverhand,
Vajra Safahr, Mirt, or a magister provides enough evi-
dence for them to act on.

Once Manshoon's whereabouts are established, the
City Guard cordons off and surrounds Kolat Towers.
The Blackstaff and the Watchful Order assist as needed.
If the characters deactivated the force field, the siege is
brief and Manshoon's forces are routed. If the force field
remains in place, the Watchful Order can deactivate it.

When all is said and done, Manshoon is forced to re-
treat to his extradimensional sanctum. From there, he

continues his search for the Vault of Dragons while fend-

ing off attackers.

STEAL MANSHOON'S SPELLBOOK

Stealing the spellbook from area E13 causes Manshoon
to slow his search for the Vault of Dragons while he
either tries to replace it or sends a simulacrum (see ap-
pendix B) and other forces to retrieve it,

KOLAT TOWERS

This dilapidated, two-towered edifice stands tall in the
Southern Ward. Its neighbors are aware of the magi-
cal force field that surrounds it, and they can see light
from continual flame spells spilling out of the windows,

CHAPTER 8 | WINTER WIZARDRY

Despite these persistent magical effects, most folk
believe the structure is abandoned. Others think it’s
haunted by the ghosts of the Kolat brothers. Theyre
wrong, of course,

Manshoon posts no visible guards outside Kolat
Towers, since he wants others to believe the site is aban-
doned. The evil wizard and his underlings come and go
using teleportation circles inside the towers.

FORCE FIELD

An invisible field of magical force surrounds and covers
Kolat Towers. The field is paper-thin and stands just
outside the outer wall of the estate, extending upward
to contain the buildings in their entirety. Nothing can
pass through the barrier, including air, fog, rain, and
snow. Creatures that don't realize the field is there
bounce off it, with birds especially prone to striking it.
The ground outside the field is regularly littered with
the tiny corpses of birds that broke their necks hit-
ting it, and street cleaners come by every morning to
sweep them up.

= = = = = 2 = = ——

DIGGING UNDER THE FORCE FIELD

There are no openings in the force field, which extends
1 foot underground. It takes 1 hour for a character with
a shovel to dig a hole deep enough for a Medium crea-
ture to squeeze through, going under the field to the
other side of the towers’ outer wall. Since Kolat Towers
is surrounded by other buildings, there's a 75 percent
chance that any digging attracts 2d6 members of the
City Watch (veterans), who put a stop to 1it.



@@@ 10 @@@



UsSING MAGIC TO BypAass THE FORCE FIELD
Characters can use magic such as a dimension door or
misty step spell to teleport from one side of the force
field to the other. A disintegrate spell or a successful dis-
pel magic (DC 19) spell cast at the field creates a 10-foot-
square opening that lasts for 1 minute.

DESTROYING THE FORCE FIELD
A magic rune in area K18 generates the force field. De-
stroying that rune ends the effect.

KOLAT TOWERS FEATURES

The following general features apply to Kolat Towers:

« Kolat Towers is a multistory structure, with each
level standing 20 feet higher than the one below it,

[ts rooms have 15-foot-high ceilings, with 7-foot-high
doorways connecting them.

» Climbing the outside walls without equipment re-
quires a successful DC 15 Strength (Athletics) check.

+ Each of the doors in the towers, as well as the door in
the outer wall, is made of iron-bound oak and has AC
16, 27 hit points, and immunity to poison and psychic
damage. If a door is locked, it can be picked by a char-
acter who makes a successful DC 15 Dexterity check
using thieves' tools, or it can be forced open with a
successful DC 20 Strength (Athletics) check. Man-
shoon, Manafret Cherryport, and Havia Quickknife
have keys to the locked doors.

« Windows have leaded frames and dirty glass panes.
They are latched from within and swing inward on
iron hinges. A successful DC 11 Dexterity check using
thieves' tools opens a window from the outside.

+ Unless otherwise noted, all areas are brightly lit by
continual flame spells cast on wall sconces.

» Some of the staircases in Kolat Towers are invisible.
They are revealed by a see favisibility spell or similar
magic. A creature traversing stairs it can't see can
move on the steps at half speed without any problem.
A creature that moves any faster than half speed must
succeed on a DC 10 Dexterity (Acrobatics) check or
slip, tumble down the stairs, and fall prone at the bot-
tom of them.

AREAS OF KOLAT TOWERS

The following encounter locations are keyed to map 8.1.

K1. STOREROOM

The outer door is locked from the inside, and the room
has neither heat nor light sources. Crates stacked
around the room are packed with meat, and bear the
seal of the Fellowship of Salters, Packers, and Joiners.

K2. DINING ROOM
This room contains the following features:

« Three Zhents in black armor sit around a stone dining
table, playing Three-Dragon Ante (a card game). The
table is set with silver,

+ Eight moth-eaten banners hang from the walls. Each
bears an arcane sigil that represents a different one of
the eight schools of magic.

Zhents. The card players are Sidra Romeir (LE fe-
male Calishite human veteran) and two subordinates
(LE male Tethvrian human thugs). Since the force field
around Kolat Towers keeps out riffraff, Sidra assumes
the characters are guests of Manshoon arriving for
a clandestine meeting. If the characters give her no
reason to believe otherwise, she and her thugs escort
them wherever they ask to go. If it becomes clear that
the characters don'’t belong in the towers, Sidra and her
thugs attack. Combat in this area draws the attention of
Manafret Cherryport in area K3, who investigates.

Sidra wears a teleporter ring (see “Teleporter
Rings,” page 157).

Treasure. Silverware on the table is worth 100 gp.

K3. KITCHEN
Mouthwatering scents fill this room, which contains the
following features:

« If he hasn't already been drawn elsewhere, a portly
halfling stands atop a stool and cooks at an iron stove.

« A green, ghostly hand floats above a trellis table, hold-
ing a knife and cutting carrots and celery.

- A staircase curves up one wall, leading to area K7.

Zhent Cook. The halfling, Manafret Cherryport, is
one of Manshoon's lieutenants. He loves to cook, and
uses his mage hand cantrip to cut vegetables. He as-
sumes the characters are intruders unless convinced
otherwise. Any ability check to do so is made with dis-
advantage, since Manafret knows that Manshoon would
have informed him if guests were expected. If the mage
suspects the characters are intruders, he surreptitiously
pours a vial of assassin’s blood (see “Poisons” in chapter
8 of the Dungeon Master’s Guide) into the stew before
asking them to taste it and give him an honest critique.
He then cries out to the guards in area K2 and attacks.
Combat in this area draws the attention of the Zhents in
areas K2 and K7, who investigate.

Manafret is a lightfoot halfling mage, with
these changes:

« Manafret is neutral evil and has 31 (9d6) hit points.

.« He has these racial traits: He is Small, and his walk-
ing speed is 25 feet. He can move through the space
of a Medium or larger creature. He has advantage on
saving throws against being frightened. He speaks
Common and Halfling.

-‘ ﬂ
KoLaTr TOwWERS LORE

With a successful DC 15 Intelligence (History) check, a
character can recall the following information about Kolat
Towers. An NPC familiar with Waterdeep's history, such as
Mirt or Volo, can also provide this information.

+ Kolat Towers once belonged to two eccentric brothers,
Duhlark and Alcedor Kolat. Both were wizards.

+ Over time, the brothers discovered new ways to harness
magic, but Duhlark became paranoid that others might
steal their secrets, He encased Kolat Towers in a magical
force field.

» Duhlark's paranoia continued to grow, until he sus-
pected Alcedor of selling their secrets. Alcedor left the
towers, never to be heard from again, and Duhlark be-
came a recluse who died in his own fortress.

e eeee————————————i

o

CHAPTER 8 | WINTER WIZARDRY

B

iy
¥ |
i



@@@ 11 @@@



Manafret wears a teleporter ring (see “Teleporter
Rings,” page 157).

Treasure. A cupboard holds a dozen jars of herbs
and spices. Among them is a flask labeled “Assassin’s
Blood,” which contains six doses of the poison.

K4. MusTy LIBRARY
This musty room is situated at the bottom of the main

tower, and it has no door on level 1. It contains the fol-
lowing features:

« A suit of dented plate armor stands in the center
of the room.

» Tomes are packed into built-in stone bookshelves,
with a tall alcove above each shelf holding a gargoyle.
(Two of these sculptures are living gargoyles.)

« An in-progress game of Dragonchess sits on a marble
table in a reading nook.

« A stone staircase spirals up to area Ko6.

Gargoyles. The two real gargoyles are indistinguish-
able from the inanimate gargoyvle statues in the high
alcoves, When intruders start poking around the room,
the gargoyles swoop down and attack.

Tomes. Any character who spends an hour searching
the bookshelves finds a fat tome titled Flumph Mating
Rituals, with an embossed image of two lumphs on
the cover, their tendrils entwined. The cover is a false
one, wrapping around a tome bound in dragon hide—a
disguised spellbook that contains the following wiz-
ard spells: arcane lock, burning hands, comprehend
languages, counterspell, darkvision, dimmension door,
find familiar, levitate, sending, and unseen servant.
(You can replace any of these spells with a spell of the
same level.)

Treasure. The Dragonchess set is made of hand-
carved ivory and is worth 500 gp.

K5. GARBAGE-FILLED RooM

This room is on level 1 of the outermost tower but isn't
accessible from that floor. It reeks of garbage and has
the following features:

« Ankle-deep refuse fills the chamber.
« Black scorch marks stretch from floor to ceiling along
the walls and the stairs, which lead up to area K10.

Manshoon's servants throw their garbage here. The
Kolat brothers created some magic items in this room,
and an experiment gone awry caused the scorch marks.

K6. MAIN TOWER LANDING AND LEDGE
Level 2 of the main tower has the following features:

+ A stone landing with no railings has a door leading

to area K7 and a stone spiral staircase descending to
area K4. An invisible staircase with no railings (see
“Kolat Towers Features,” page 149) hugs the wall as

it climbs from the landing to area K11.

Across from the landing, a wide stone ledge protrudes
from the northeast wall beneath a window. A pair of
identical wooden chests sits atop the ledge. (One chest
is real. The other is a mimic.)

Ledge. There's no easy way to access the ledge, which
is 8 feet away from the landing and at the same height.

CHAPTER 8 | WINTER WIZARDRY

Characters can try to jump onto the ledge, or they can
hook a rope onto the railing on the level above (area
K11) and swing across the gap. They can also use magic
to cross. Anyone who falls off the landing or the ledge
lands in area K4, 20 feet below.

Mimic. A character who touches the mimic becomes
adhered to it. The mimic attacks if disturbed or when a
character inspects the real chest next to it.

Treasure. The genuine chest is unlocked and contains
thirteen items, each of which can be used as an arcane
focus: two crystals (worth 10 gp each), an orb (worth 20
gp). four rods (worth 10 gp each), and six wands (worth
10 gp each).

K7. READING ROOM
This room contains the following features:

« A burly half-ore clad in black leather armor sits in an
overstulfed chair in the northernmost corner of the
room, reading a book.

« Large framed pictures of cities and landscapes hang
on the walls, and a worn, blood-spattered rug covers
the floor. Other furnishings include a pair of rocking
chairs, a couch, and an ottoman.

« Mouthwatering scents rise from a staircase that
curves down to the kitchen (area K3).

Zhent. Yorn the Terror is reading a copy of Volo’s
Guide to Monsters, autographed on the title page by the
author with an added note that reads, in Common: “For
Yorn. | hope you find the orc chapter illuminating!”

Yorn is a half-orc thug, with these changes:

» Yorn is neutral evil.

+ He has these racial traits: When reduced to 0 hit
points, he drops to 1 hit point instead (but can't do this
again until he finishes a long rest). He has darkvision
out to a range of 60 feet, He speaks Common and Orc.

Yorn values his own well-being above all else. He is
initially indifferent toward intruders. If Yorn believes the
characters aren't a threat, he’s happy to chat with them
about the inhabitants and the layout of Kolat Towers. He
has never visited Manshoon's extraplanar sanctum, but
he does know that the teleportation circle in area K22 is
the way to get there.

Combat in this area draws the attention of Manafret
Cherryport in area K3, who investigates.

Treasure. Yorn carries 36 cp, 20 sp, 12 gp, 8 taols,
and a gem-studded ivory toothpick (worth 25 gp)
in a pouch.

K8. APPRENTICE BEDROOM
This narrow room contains the following features:

« Three single beds are bunched less than an arm’s
length apart beneath a staircase that leads up
to area K12,

+ At the foot of each bed is a wooden chest.

The Kolat brothers once took on apprentices, who
slept here. Manshoon now allows his own apprentices—
Ered Pavno, Havi Termock, and Savara Firethorn—to do
the same. All three can be found in area K15.

Treasure. Inside each chest is a set of common
clothes, a spare spell component pouch, candles, ink,



@@@ 12 @@@



Broken stairs
up to area K17

Main Tower

Outer Tower

Upto
area K22

invisible stairs
up to area Kl

=X

| &:ﬁ. F\

T SO \ N
N Ko y..,—f
’ ' /

MAae B4 KOLAT TawERS

CHAPTER & | WINTER WIZARDRY



@@@ 13 @@@



pens, paper, and 3d6 gp. Each chest also holds a spell-
book that contains all the spells its owner has prepared.
In addition, Ered’s spellbook contains burning hands,
knock, and lightning bolt, Havi's spellbook contains
charm person, detect thoughts, and major image; and
Savara’s spellbook contains comprehend languages,
phantasmal force, and phantom steed.

K9. BRIDGE AND WALKWAY

A wooden bridge connects the two towers 20 feet above
the ground, and a walkway attached to the bridge encir-
cles the outside of the outer tower. The bridge and the
tower walkway lack railings. Their planks and stones
groan and crack underfoot but are safe to walk on.

K10. WIZARD STATUE
This level of the outer tower consists of a landing and a
narrow ledge with the following features:

« The landing is 10 feet square and is met by two stair-
cases, One descends 20 feet to area K5, and one as-
cends 20 feet to area K20.

« The narrow ledge built into the southeast wall has a
life-size statue of a bearded human wizard standing
atop it. The wizard looks angry and is leveling a stone
wand at the door to area K9,

Statue. The statue depicts Duhlark Kolat, and a
detect magic spell or similar magic reveals an aura of
transmutation magic around it. The first time a char-
acter steps onto the landing, the statue levitates 1 foot
above the ledge and intones the following warning
in Common:

“| am Dubhlark Kolat, the great wizard and master of this
tower! How dare you invade my home! Leave at once or

I l

* L

be destroyed by magic beyond your comprehension!”

L “

The threat is empty, but the statue continues to levitate
for 1 minute before sinking back down to the ledge.
The magic resets after 1 hour. While it is levitating, the
statue can be easily pushed or pulled around.

Casting dispel magic on the statue while it's floating
causes it to fall, topple off the ledge, and shatter in area
K5 below. Anyone in that area when the statue falls
must succeed on a DC 10 Dexterity saving throw or take
22 (4d10) bludgeoning damage.

K1l. LABORATORY

This room consists of a ledge connected to the levels
above and below by invisible staircases (see “Kolat Tow-
ers Features,” page 149). One staircase descends 20

feet to area KO, and the other climbs 20 feet to area K15.

The area contains the following features:

- Shattered glass covers the floor, and a large wooden
trellis table has been knocked on its side.
« A large empty cabinet dominates the back wall.

This laboratory has been picked clean by Manshoon
and contains nothing of value.

\CHAPTER 8 | WINTER WIZARDRY

K12, STAFF DIsPLAY
This room contains the following features:

- A half-dozen staffs of various styles are hung proudly
on the walls at the top of the landing.
« A staircase descends to area K8.

Staffs. Each staff is different in construction and style:

a twisted birch branch, a sturdy oak dowel, a glittering
haft of stone, a steel pole carved with blue runes, a dim-
pled copper staff topped with a copper crescent moon,

and a blown-glass cane capped with a black marble orb.

All six staffs animate and attack interlopers who enter
the area without being escorted by Manshoon or one of
his lieutenants. The staffs have the same statistics as
flying swords, except they deal bludgeoning damage on
a hit. If a ight breaks out in this area, the creatures in
area K14 come to investigate.

K13. HoLpinG CELL

The door to this room has a narrow, barred window set
into it. The door is locked and trapped (see below). As
the characters approach the door, read:

A raspy voice calls out from beyond the door. “If you

be good, let us rid these towers of evil's stench. If you
be evil, open the door so we may battle, and my eternal
boredom can end.” Beyond the door's barred window,
a gargoyle lurks in a stone cell, challenging you in a low
growl. “Come on, then!"

Trapped Door. A glyph of warding spell has been cast
on the door, set to trigger when it is opened by anyone
other than Manshoon. The glyph, which resembles an
ornate letter M, can be found with a successful DC 18
Intelligence (Investigation) check. The glyph targets the
creature that opens the door with a blindness/dealness
spell (save DC 18).

Lady Gondafrey. Duhlark Kolat long ago trapped
a magical experiment in this cell: a gargoyle that has
been imbued with the personality of a human knight of
Tyr (god of justice) named Lady Gondafrey. This gar-
goyle has an Intelligence score of 10 and an alignment
of lawful good. It speaks Common, and its face looks
more humanoid than gargoyle. Manshoon is amused by
the creature, so he keeps it alive but locked in the cell.

If the characters free Lady Gondafrey, she offers to
fight alongside them; however, she quickly turns against
any character who exhibits cruel or unlawful behavior.
She can offer helpful information about Kolat Towers,
and she is familiar with both the layout of the towers
and the current occupants of the place. She knows that
Manshoon resides in an extraplanar sanctum accessible
through a teleportation circle that his lieutenants can
activate using special rings. The gargoyle doesn’t know
where the teleportation circle is located, nor does she
know why Duhlark transferred her consciousness into
her present form.

The gargoyle retains fragmented memories of the life
of Lady Gondafrey, a native Waterdavian who served
in the City Watch. After identifying Duhlark Kolat as a



@@@ 14 @@@



suspect in several local disappearances, she darkened
his doorstep in 1379 DR, the Year of the Lost Keep.
Annaoyed by this invasion of his privacy and not in his
right mind, Duhlark captured Lady Gondafrey, used a
spell to meld her form with that of a gargoyle, and im-
prisoned her.

If the gargoyle travels with the party, roll a d10 each
day at dawn. On a roll of 1, Lady Gondafrey’s alignment
becomes chaotic evil for 24 hours as the gargoyle's in-
nate demeanor exerts itself. In this state, the creature
tries to orchestrate the characters’ deaths, going so far
as to attack lone characters.

K14. SERVANTS' QUARTERS
This room contains the following features:

+ Furnishings include four beds, a small table with four
chairs, and tattered window curtains.

» Four Zhent thugs relax here—one trying to rest, two
others playing cards, and the fourth sitting on the
edge of a bed, re-stringing a heavy crossbow.

The thugs work for Manshoon and leap up to attack
anvone they don’t recognize as one of their own. A suc-
cessful DC 17 Charisma (Deception) check convinces
these Zhents that the characters are their allies,

Treasure. Resting in small piles and neat stacks on
the table are 74 cp, 52 sp, 19 gp, and 4 taols.

K15. SUMMONING CHAMBER

This room is connected to the levels above and below by
invisible staircases (see “Kolat Towers Features,” page
149), one descending 20 feet to area K11 and the other
climbing 20 feet to area K16. This area contains the fol-
lowing features:

« A 10-foot-diameter circle of runes has been drawn on
the floor in blood that is now dried. Smoke billows
from four iron braziers placed around the circle.

+ Three apprentice wizards (see appendix B) stand out-

side the circle, chanting an incantation. A barlgura is
slumped motionless within the circle.

The three wizards here are Manshoon's apprentices—
Ered Payno (LE male Damaran human), Havi Termock
(CE female Chondathan human), and Savara Firethorn
(NE female Tethyrian human). Each wears a feleporter
ring (see “Teleporter Rings,” page 157). The magical
incantation that the three are reciting has quelled the
barlgura and rendered it unconscious. If any of them
stop chanting, the demon awakes and becomes enraged,
though it remains bound within the circle. Whenever it
takes damage, the barlgura can attempt a DC 10 Cha-
risma check. On a successful check. it breaks out of the
circle and attacks any creature it can reach.

Freeing the barlgura disrupts Manshoon’s operation,
forcing the wizard to spend time and resources defeat-
ing the fiend and replacing slain underlings.

K16. CoNsTRUCT WORKSHOP

The invisible staircase from area K15 ends in front of
a closed door. The door is unlocked and opens into the
room, which contains the following:

« Bits of clay, stone, bone, and metal litter the floor and
cover a wooden table in the middle of the room.

+ The Acor creaks and tilts slightly when stepped on,
and it can be seen to be detached from the walls. Two
oversized iron clamps on opposite sides of the room
hold the floor in place. Each of these rusty mecha-
nisms is attached to an iron lever.

« A wooden staircase once climbed 20 feet to the next
level, but it has partially collapsed.

The Kolat brothers once crafted constructs in this
workshop. The magical clamped floor was built as a pre-
caution in case one of the experiments went berserk,

When a creature that doesn’t work for Manshoon's
Zhentarim enters this room without being escorted, the
metal scraps on the floor fly together, forming a suit of
animated armor that attacks. When the armor is re-
duced to 10 hit points or fewer, it tries to pull one of the
levers on its next turn.

Floor Clamps. Pulling a lever is an action that causes
both clamps to release the floor, which is then magically
driven upward into the ceiling. Creatures standing on
the floor are knocked prone and must make a DC 20
Dexterity saving throw as they slam into the ceiling,
taking 22 (4d10) bludgeoning damage on a failed save,
or half as much damage on a successful one. The floor
then settles a few feet below the ceiling, cutting off ac-
cess to the stairs down to area K15 but leaving charac-
ters free to climb up the collapsed staircase to area K17.
(The magical floor was designed to prevent a berserk
golem from reaching the lower chambers of the towers,
and potentially the city beyond, while the Kolat brothers
dealt with it.) After 10 minutes, the floor descends to its
normal level and the clamps lock it down again.

Partially Collapsed Stairs. A creature can climb
the stairs to area K17 with a successful DC 10 Dexter-
ity (Acrobatics) check. If the check fails, the creature
falls 10 feet.

K17. FLEsSH GOLEM
This unlit hallway contains the following features:

» Any character who inspects the hall for traps and suc-
ceeds on a DC 17 Wisdom (Perception) check notices
l1-inch-diameter holes drilled into the walls at ankle
height, set at regular intervals along the length of
the passage.

+ A flesh golem stands in front of the door to area K18.

« A one-way secret door is set into the innermost wall.

Golem Trap. The flesh golem was created by Duhlark
Kolat. Manshoon chose to leave it here and instructed
his lieutenants not to disturb it. It moves to attack
anyone other than Duhlark who approaches within 10
feet of it. A character disguised as Duhlark (using the
statue in area K10 as a model) can fool the golem with a
successful DC 10 Charisma (Deception) check.

The golem stands on a pressure plate. When it steps
off the plate to attack someone out of its reach, the X
weight on the plate is lifted, causing poison gas to erupt ~
from the holes in the walls. When the trap triggers, each fja

«
creature in the hall must make a DC 12 Constitution )ﬁ

-

saving throw, taking 10 (3d6) poison damage on a failed
saving throw, or half as much damage on a successful
one. The gas lingers for 1 minute unless dispersed with
a gust of wind spell or similar magic. While the gas

CHAPTER 8 | WINTER WIZARDEY 18

o,



@@@ 15 @@@







@@@ 16 @@@







@@@ 17 @@@



persists, a creature in the hall must repeat the saving
throw at the start of each of its turns. The golem is im-
mune to the poison gas.

One-Way Secret Door. A character who makes a suc-
cessful DC 15 Wisdom (Perception) check notices the
secret door that leads to area K19, This door opens nor-
mally only from inside area K19, and only a knock spell
or similar magic can force it open from this side.

K18. ARCANE RUNE

This unlit hall is choked with dust and cobwebs. It con-
tains the following features:

» An elaborate rune is inscribed on the back wall at the
southernmost end of the hall. (The rune isn't visible
from the doorway to area K17.)

« A secret door is set into the innermost wall.

Arcane Rune. A detect magic spell or similar magic
reveals a powerful aura of conjuration magic around the
rune. A successful DC 15 Intelligence (Arcana) check
confirms that this rune sustains the force field around
Kolat Towers, and that the rune can be destroyed. It has
AC 10, 22 hit points, and immunity to poison and psy-
chic damage. The rune can’t be dispelled normally, but
each successlul dispel magic cast on it (DC 19) deals 16
(3d10) force damage to it.

The first time damage is dealt to the rune, a red slaad
magically springs forth from it and attacks all creatures
in the hallway.

When the rune is destroyed, the force field around
Kolat Towers disappears.

Secret Door. A character who makes a successful DC
15 Wisdom (Perception) check notices the secret door
that leads to area K19.

K19. DUHLARK'S BEDROOM
This room is accessible through either of the secret

doors that lead to areas K17 and K18. It contains the
following features:

« A flameskull bobs in the middle of the room, which is
choked with dust and cobwebs,

« An oval canopy bed veiled in cobwebs sits across from
two narrow bookshelves.

« The room smells like a tomb.

Manshoon found Duhlark Kolat’s skeletal remains in
the bed and transformed his skull into a lameskull. He
left the rest of the bones alone, hidden behind cobwebs.
The flameskull attacks anyone other than Manshoon
who confronts it, shouting, “Get out of my house!” be-
tween casting spells and throwing off fire rays.

Bookshelves. Manshoon removed any tomes of
value from the bedroom, leaving noticeable gaps on the
shelves between mundane books on a variety of eso-
teric subjects.

Among the volumes on one shelf is a false book titled
The Man from Damara—a wooden block painted to re-
semble a book, which is wired to a secret compartment
in the base of the shelf. A character can detect the shelf
and discern how to open it with a successful DC 15 Wis-
dom (Perception) check. Tugging on the book causes the

CHAPTER 8 | WINTER WIZARDRY

compartment to pop open, revealing Duhlark’s wand of
binding hidden inside.

K20. ALCEDOR’S PRIVATE LIBRARY
This room has the following features:

« A tall oak bookshelf contains a few scattered books
(all mundane and worthless), but is mostly bare.
Above the bookshelf hangs a beautifully crafted sign
that reads "Alcedor” in Common.

« A staircase descends 20 feet to area K10,

K2l. DUHLARK'S PRIVATE LIBRARY
This room has the following features:

« A tall oak bookshelf holds a few dozen books. Above
the bookshelf hangs a beautifully crafted sign that
reads “Duhlark” in Common.

« A staircase ascends 20 feet to area K22.

Bookshelf. The bookshelf holds thirtv books in total.
If any of them are disturbed, they fly off the shelves and
form a swarm that attacks all creatures in the room.
The book collection has the statistics of a swarm of
bats, with these changes:

« The books lack the Echolocation and Keen Hear-
ing traits.

- Replace the swarm’s Bites attack option with a Slam
attack option that deals the same amount of bludgeon-
ing damage.

If there are no creatures to attack on its turn, the book
collection returns to the bookshelf. The books are other-
wise nonmagical and cover a wide array of subjects.

K22, TELEPORTATION CIRCLE

A staircase rising from area K21 leads to this highest
chamber of the outer tower. It contains the follow-
ing features:

« A spectator floats in the middle of the room, and four
flying snakes flutter above the rafters.

« Runes inscribed an the floor form a large, faintly glow-
ing circle.

» Five wooden treasure chests with sturdy padlocks rest
against the walls.

Guardians. The spectator guards the treasure chests
and attacks intruders who aren’t being escorted by Man-
shoon or one of his lieutenants. The flying snakes join

the battle, fighting as allies of the spectator.
Teleportation Circle. The teleportation circle func-
tions as described under the spell of the same name in
the Player's Handbook. Additionally, a creature wearing
a teleporter ring (see “Teleporter Rings,” page 157)
can use this circle to access the teleportation circle in
Manshoon's sanctum (area E1). A teleporter ring that is
brought within 5 feet of the circle begins to hum softly.
Treasure Chests. The padlocks on the chests are
illusory but feel real to the touch. A defect magic spell or
similar magic reveals an aura of illusion magic around
each one. Attempts to pick or break the locks fail, but a
knock spell or similar magic causes a lock to open.
Chest 1 has the image of an anvil carved into its lid. It
contains a set of smith's tools (worth 20 gp).



@@@ 18 @@@



Chest 2 has iron bands and contains a set of painter’s
supplies (worth 10 gp), as well as three small pots of col-
ored paint (blue, red, and yellow).

Chest 3 has tiny clawed feet and contains six blank
spellbooks with leather covers (worth 50 gp each).

Chest 4 has a flat lid with a city scene painted on it.

[t contains a scholar’s pack (worth 40 gp) and a book
of Dwarvish phrases. A character who doesn’t speak
Dwarvish can use the book to communicate on a rudi-
mentary level with friendly dwarves.

Chest 5 is inlaid with silver and topped with a silver
statuette of a rearing hippogriff (worth 25 gp). Inside is a
wooden rack that holds eight glass vials—six containing
potions of healing and two containing individual doses
of essence of ether (see “Poisons” in chapter 8 of the
Dungeon Master’s Guide), The poison can be identified
with a successful DC 13 Intelligence (Nature) check.

EXTRADIMENSIONAL
SANCTUM

Manshoon's extradimensional sanctum exists in a finite
demiplane. Created by the original Manshoon, it is
known to the wizard’s clones, and it currently serves as
the lair of the clone described in this adventure.

Outside Manshoon’s sanctum, the demiplane is a vast
void filled with swirling purple mist. Any creature that
enters this mist is teleported to area E1 and must make
a DC 18 Constitution saving throw, taking 22 (4d10)
force damage on a failed save, or half as much damage
on a suceessful one.

There are no cardinal directions in this extradimen-
sional space; compasses spin futilely in the absence of
north, south, east, and west.

SANCTUM FEATURES

These features apply to all areas in the extradimen-
sional sanctum:

« Rooms have 10-foot-high ceilings, with 8-foot-high
passages and 7-foot-high doorways connecting them.
The walls, floors, and ceilings throughout are made of
seamless alabaster.

+ Doors are made of iron and have AC 19, 27 hit points,
and immunity to poison and psychic damage. A locked
door can be picked by someone who makes a suc-
cessful DC 17 Dexterity check using thieves' tools, or
can be forced open with a suceessful DC 25 Strength
(Athletics) check. As an action, Manshoon or his
simulacrum can lock or unlock any door in the sanc-
tum by touch.

+ Except where noted, areas of the sanctum are brightly
lit by continual flame spells cast on wall sconces,

AREAS OF THE SANCTUM

The following locations are keyed to map 8.2.

El. ARRIVAL POINT

This room is the extradimensional sanctum’s anchor to
the Material Plane, and one can teleport to this chamber

- - - .

TELEPORTER RINGS

To access Manshoon's extraplanar sanctum, one needs a
teleporter ring: a brass signet ring bearing a stylized M, and
which emanates an aura of conjuration magic when tar-
geted by a detect magic spell or similar magic. Manshoon
gives these rings to his most trusted servants.

As an action, a creature wearing a teleporter ring can ac-
tivate the teleportation circle either in area K22 or area E1,
teleporting itself and up to six other willing creatures from

one circle to the other,
m

from other places on the Material Plane. The room has
the following features:

» A teleportation circle is inscribed on the alabaster
floor here. Characters teleported to this area from
area K22 appear within the circle.

« The ceiling and three of the walls are made of 6-inch-
thick sheets of transparent glass, through which the
swirling purple mist that fills the demiplane can be
seen. The fourth wall is made of alabaster and has a
locked iron door set into it (leading to area E2).

+ A black-robed female human with a bald, scarred head
watches this room through a glass window set into the
wall of another room (area E3).

Dreadful Host. The figure watching through the win-
dow is Kaevja Cynavern (see area E3), and she can see
thraugh the purple mist between the two rooms easily
enough. She uses a sending spell to contact Manshoon
as soon as the characters arrive. Manshoon sends his
simulacrum (see appendix B) to unlock the door to area
E2 and greet the new arrivals. It takes 1 minute for the
simulacrum to arrive (from area E7), during which time
Kaevja uses another sending spell to inform a random
character that “Your gracious host is on the way, and
looks forward to meeting you.”

When the simulacrum arrives, it passes itself off as
Manshoon as it welcomes the characters to its extradi-
mensional sanctum. It offers a guided tour, gesturing for
the characters to enter area E2 ahead of it. If they com-
ply, it triggers the alarm in area E2 and attacks.

Glass Walls. Each 5-foot section of glass wall has AC
13, 30 hit points, and immunity to acid, poison, and psy-
chic damage. The purple mist that fills the demiplane
doesn’t enter this area even if the glass is shattered.

Teleportation Circle. The teleportation circle func-
tions as described under the spell of the same name in
the Player's Handbook. Additionally, a creature wearing
a teleporter ring (see “Teleporter Rings,” page 157) can
use this circle to access the teleportation circle in Kolat
Towers (area K22). A teleporter ring that is brought
within 5 feet of the circle begins to hum softly.

E2. FOYER

The door to area E1 is locked. All other doors leading
from this room are unlocked. This foyer has the follow-
ing features:

« Set into the alabaster floor is a large symbol in black
marble, depicting a winged snake biting a coin. Char-
acters recognize this as the symbol of the Zhentarim.
(The coin conceals an alarm mechanism.)

CHAPTER 8 | WINTER WIZARDRY 2B



@@@ 19 @@@



Al (MY A2z Y

<

One square = 5 feet

Map 8.2: ExTRADIMENSIONAL SANCTUM

« Hanging on the walls are twelve metal masks bearing
human-like visages.

Alarmm Mechanism. The 1-foot-diameter, disk-shaped
tile that serves as the coin in the Zhentarim symbol is
actually a pressure plate. When pressed or stepped on,
it sounds a magic gong that can be heard throughout
the sanctum. The alarm can be disabled by someone
who makes a successful DC 20 Dexterity check using
thieves' tools, but it triggers accidentally if the check
fails by 5 or more. The alarm brings the following de-
fenders, who attack all intruders in the room:

+ Kaevja Cynavern (see area E3)

» The Manshoon simulacrum (see area E7)

« Vevette Blackwater and Agorn Fuoco (see area ES)
« Havia Quickknife and Mookie Plush (see area E10)

If the characters manage to overcome all these foes,
they are free to explore the sanctum. Manshoon awaits
them in area E12.

Characters who are reduced to 0 hit points by Man-
shoon’s defenders are knocked unconscious. If the
entire party is defeated, the unconscious characters are
stripped of their spellbooks and magic items (including
' any teleporter rings they obtained in Kolat Towers).
They then awaken in a back alley of Waterdeep with 1
hit point each. If the characters return to Kolat Towers,
they find the place cleared out and the teleportation cir-
cle in area K22 permanently dispelled.

Masks of Manshoon. The masks belong to Manshoon
and have been worn by him in the past. A detect magic

.I CHAFPTER 8 | WINTER WIZARDRY

,ﬂ;\

|
}
|
|

A TR AN [ A aa Aan N L

NS
.
3
/7=

I

Ik

=\ AR

spell or similar magic reveals an aura of evocation
magic around each one. Any creature that dons a mask
takes 9 (2d8) lightning damage. Once this effect trig-
gers, the mask becomes nonmagical and harmless.

E3. GUARD STATION

A S-foot-square window in this area looks out toward
area E1. Unless she has been drawn elsewhere, Kaevija
Cynavern stands watch in front of the window.

Kaevja was a Red Wizard of Thay until she saw an
opportunity o study magic under Manshoon. Before
he accepted her, Manshoon forced her to remove her
distinctive Thayvan head tattoos and to trade in her Red
Wizard robes for black ones.

Kaevja Cynavern is a female Mulan human mage,
with these changes:

« Kaevija is lawful evil. She knows Common, Draconic,
Dwarvish, and Elvish.

+ She has the sending spell prepared instead of the fly
spell, and she carries a yellow elemental gem.

In battle, Kaevja breaks the elemental gem, summon-
ing an earth elemental and commanding it to attack
her enemies,

E4. PANTRY
This room contains the following features:

+ Floor-to-ceiling shelves are stuffed with breads,
cheeses, dried meats, nuts, and a few baskets of
fresh produce.



@@@ 20 @@@



+ Two barrels labeled “WATER” and two labeled “ALE”
are crammed into a corner.

E5. LABORATORY
This room contains the following features:

« Beakers, bottles, and test tubes are set on a marble ta-
ble in the middle of this room, next to a basin of water.

» One staircase descends 10 feet to area E2, and an-
other ascends 10 feet to area EG6.

Urstul Floxin. 1f he survived earlier encounters with
the characters, Urstul Floxin (see appendix B) stands
at the table, dourly scrubbing lab equipment. He is
being punished for allowing the Stone of Golorr to
slip through his fingers (during the events of chapter
3). Nevertheless, he remains loyal to Manshoon, If he
is confronted, Urstul feigns anger toward the wizard
and offers to help the characters defeat him, but this
ruse can be seen through by someone who makes a
successful DC 14 Wisdom (Insight) check. Given the
chance, Urstul leads the characters to Manshoon, then
attacks them to prove his unwavering loyalty in front of
his master.

If the characters fall for Urstul's ruse but nevertheless
demand that he relinquish his weapons in order to
accompany them, the Zhent assassin laughs at them
and attacks.

E6. BinDING CHAMBER
A circle inscribed with runes is carved into the alabaster
floor of this room. It radiates an aura of abjuration magic
when targeted by a detect magic spell or similar magic.
Manshoon uses the circle to bind extraplanar crea-
tures. When a celestial, an elemental, a fey, or a fiend
is summoned inside the circle, it can't voluntarily leave
that area until its summoner uses an action to suppress
the circle’s magic for 1 minute. The magic is also sup-
pressed if any part of the circle falls within an antimagic
field, or if dispel magic (DC 17) is successfully cast on it.

E7. MANSHOON'S SIMULACRUM
This room is extremely cold and contains the follow-
ing features:

+ Frigid air blows into the room through small vents
in the floor. In the middie of the room is an open sar-
cophagus carved from ice, which contains a humanoid
figure made of snow.

« The back wall is made of 5-inch-thick curved glass.
Frost covers the glass, partially blotting out the swirl-
ing purple mist of the demiplane beyond.

Simulacrum. 1l it hasn't been summoned elsewhere,
Manshoon’s simulacrum (see appendix B) is standing
before the glass wall with its back to the door. The
simulacrum resembles a robed wizard with long black
hair, pale skin, and an articulated metal left hand and
forearm. Its face is concealed behind a steel mask that
bears a smiling visage. The simulacrum attacks anyone
it doesn’t recognize.

Extreme Cold. The rules for extreme cold (see chap-
ter 5 of the Dungeon Master's Guide) apply in this room.
Giass Wali. Each 5-foot section of glass wall has AC
13, 30 hit points, and immunity to acid, poison, and psy-

chic damage. The purple mist that fills the demiplane
doesn’t enter this room even if the glass is shattered.
Simulacrum Sarcophagus, This ice-carved container
weighs 1,000 pounds and begins to melt if taken out of
the room. The snow hgure in the sarcophagus is part
of the material component of a simulacrum spell. Man-
shoon can use it to create a new simulacrum if his cur-
rent one is destroyed.

E8. READING ROOM
This room contains the following features:

+ Delightful warmth radiates from a brazier of green
flame encircled by eight cushioned chairs.

« Unless they've been drawn elsewhere, two of Man-
shoon’s lieutenants are here: Vevette Blackwater (CE
female Tethyrian human swashbuckler; see appendix
B) and Agorn Fuoco (NE male Turami human bard;
see appendix B). Vevette is relaxing in a chair, while
Agorn strums a lyre.

» An alabaster staircase ascends 10 feet to area E9.

Zhents. Vevette and Agorn are two of Manshoon's
most trusted followers. Vevette commands the wizard's
forces against the Xanathar Guild, while Agorn com-
mands those who oppose the Zhents that aren't loyal to
Manshoon. At the moment, they are resting in the sanc-
tum while awaiting orders from Manshoon.

Green Flame Brazier. A detect magic spell or sim-
ilar magic reveals an aura of evocation magic around
the brazier. The brazier casts a fireball spell (save DC
15) centered on itself whenever a creature in the room
speaks the words “green flame” aloud. Once the brazier
has cast this spell, it can't do so again for another 24
hours. Agorn knows this feature of the brazier, and he
uses it in combat if the situation is desperate.

E9. LIBRARY
Alabaster shelves line every wall and jut out into the
center of this room, all of them packed with books that
deal with subjects of interest to wizards. Manshoon has
amassed a sizable collection, including ten rare volumes
he removed from Duhlark Kolat's collection.

Treasure. Each rare book is worth 50 gp, and the en-
tire collection is worth 5,000 gp.

E10. AUDIENCE CHAMBER

High-ranking Zhents who desire an audience with
Manshoon come here. The room contains the follow-
ing features:

« The area is split into two levels, with alabaster steps
climbing 3 feet to a smaller raised platform overlook-
ing the larger area. The platform is bare except for
three golden banners hanging on the back wall, each
displaying the symbol of the Zhentarim—a black,
winged snake biting a coin.

« The lower part of the room contains a black marble
table surrounded by high-backed wooden chairs. The
table stands out in stark contrast against the alabaster
walls and floor.

+ If they haven't been drawn elsewhere, two of Man-
shoon’s followers are sparring and engaged in mock
fisticuffs atop the table.

CHAPTER 8 | WINTER WIZARDRY

@@@ 1 @@@



Zhents. Two female lightfoot halflings—Havia Quick-
knife and Mookie Plush—believe that Manshoon is the
rightful leader of the Zhentarim. They serve him fear-
lessly, and will sacrifice themselves to ensure that his
plans come to fruition. They are martial arts adepts
(see appendix B), with these changes:

« Havia and Mookie are lawful evil.

« They have 49 (11d6 + 11) hit points each.

. They have these racial traits: They are Small, and
their walking speed is 25 feet. They can move through
the space of a Medium or larger creature. They have
advantage on saving throws against being frightened.
They speak Common and Halfling.

Havia and Mookie each wear a teleporter ring (see
“Teleporter Rings,” page 157).

Ell. ZHENT QUARTERS
This room contains the following features:

» Pressed against the walls of this room are five wooden
beds (three sized for humans, two for halflings).

- Next to each bed is a wooden chest.

« An alabaster staircase descends to area E12.

Kaevja Cynavern, Vevette Blackwater, Agorn Fuoco,
Havia Quickknife, and Mookie Plush all sleep here.

Treasure, In addition to folded clothes and worthless
personal effects, each of the chests holds treasure.

Kaevja's chest contains a gold amulet inset with a red
crystal rune (worth 250 gp). A successful DC 15 Intelli-
gence (Arcana) check reveals that the rune is a symbol
of evocation, though the amulet is nonmagical.

Vevette's chest has three potions of healing.

Agorn’s chest contains a bundle of love letters from
someone named Tamzyn. Hidden in one of the enve-
lopes is an elegant platinum necklace (worth 250 gp),
featuring a tiny cameo containing a sketched portrait of
a beautiful Turami woman.

In Havia's chest is a golden comb shaped like a styl-
ized dragon with tiny rubies for eyes (worth 250 gp).

Mookie's chest contains a tiny halfling doll. Stuffed
inside the doll is a pouch that holds five 100 gp pearls.

E12. MANSHOON'S QUARTERS
No one aside from Manshoon is allowed down here. The
alabaster stairs that lead to this room descend 10 feet

farther to area E13.
This room contains the following features:

« Across from the stairs stands a large bed with pur-
ple sheets. Sitting on the edge of the bed is a hand-
some young male human in elegant robes. Long
black hair partially conceals his angelic face as he
attaches a metal appendage to the withered stump of
his left arm.

The only other piece of furniture is a table with legs
carved to resemble winged serpents. Displayed on the
table is a metal mask with an intimidating, tyranni-
cal visage.

The handsome young figure is Manshoon (see appen-
dix B), who is much older than he looks.

CHAPTER 8 | WINTER WIZARDRY

This version of Manshoon isn't spoiling for a fight.
He commends the characters for making it this far and
shows no concern for the Zhents they defeated to reach
him, since he considers all his followers expendable.
The characters’ best chance of survival is to convince
Manshoon that they can be cowed or bribed into work-
ing for him. Weary of his conflict with the Xanathar
(Guild, Manshoon suggests that the characters prove
their usefulness to him by hunting down and killing
Xanathar in its lair (see chapter 5). Manshoon also
demands that they keep his presence in Waterdeep
a secret for now, saving that he will reward them for
their discretion “when the time comes.” In exchange,
he allows the characters to return to Waterdeep and
promises them positions of power in his organization
once Xanathar’'s death is confirmed. He has no intention
ol making good on this promise, but refusing to work
for him puts the characters in a tight spot, since the evil
archwizard can't risk exposure.

[f a ight breaks out, Manshoon grabs his siaff of
power (which he hides under the bed) and holds his
ground. For more information on how to play Man-
shoon, see “Facing Manshoon™ at the beginning of
this chapter.

Tyrant's Mask. The mask on the table is nonmagical,
but Manshoon likes to put it on before meeting with his
followers,

El3. MANSHOON'S STUDY
The alabaster stairs end here. The room contains the
following features:

« A plush lavender carpet covers the floor.

« In one far corner of the room, a low table is set
between two purple couches, The table has a thin
drawer built into it,

+ In the other far corner, Manshoon's spellbook rests
atop a black marble lectern protected by an invisible
helmed horror. The construct attacks anyone other
than Manshoon who disturbs the book (becoming visi-
ble as it does so). It obeys Manshoon’s commands if he
is present, and it fights until destroyed.

Table. The table’s drawer has an arcane lock spell
cast on it. The spell can be bypassed by someone
who makes a successful DC 25 Dexterity check using
thieves' tools, or with a knock spell or similar magic.
The drawer can also be forced open with a success-
ful DC 21 Strength (Athletics) check. Inside is a
leather-bound ledger that provides a paper trail implicat-
ing Manshoon in two blackmail schemes. An hour spent
studying the ledger uncovers the following information:

» Corylus Thann, a racist Waterdavian noble, is paying
the Zhentarim not to reveal that he hired Zhent thugs
to assault nonhumans.

+ Jelenn Urmbrusk, a Waterdavian noble, receives regu-
lar payments from the Zhentarim to offset monies he
loses in bad investments.

The ledger doesn't reveal that Corylus Thann and
Jelenn Urmbrusk are Masked Lords, or that Manshoon's
blackmail of them also forces them to use their influ-



@@@ 2 @@@



ence to cover up or dismiss crimes perpetrated by Man-
shoon’s forces in Waterdeep. If the authorities obtain the
ledger, they round up anyone suspected of having ties
to Manshoon or the Zhentarim, which disrupts the wiz-
ard’s operation (see “Disrupting Manshoon’s Operation,”
page 147). Surprisingly, neither Corylus nor Jelenn is
arrested or even questioned.

Slipped into the ledger is a piece of paper with a list
of names in Manshoon’'s handwriting. Manshoon keeps
this list of Masked Lords whose identities he knows,
with check marks indicating the ones he's blackmailing:

Mirt

Corylus Thann
Thardouk Starbuckler
Jelenn Urmbrusk
Dorgar Adarbrent

Manshoon’s Spellbook. This spellbook weighs 20
pounds and is covered in beholder hide. It contains all
the spells Manshoon has prepared (see appendix B) plus
the following spells: alarm, alter self, animate dead, an-
timagic field, arcane lock, blight, dispel magic, dominate
monster, dream, etherealness, Evard’s black tentacles,
feather fall, fireball, flv, gaseous form, geas, gentle re-
pose, glyph of warding, hold monster, major image, mass
suggestion, phantom steed, protection from evil and
good, scrying, symbol, telekinesis, teleport, teleportation
circle, Tenser's floating disk, tongues, true seeing, vam-
piric touch, wall of fire, and wish. Stealing or destroy-
ing this spellbook disrupts Manshoon's operation (see
“Disrupting Manshoon's Operation,” page 147), since
he must devote time and resources to retrieving or re-
placing it.

If Laeral Silverhand has the opportunity to trade
for Manshoon's spellbook, she offers the characters a
sailing ship and a set of bracers of archery for it. Vajra
Safahr offers the characters membership in Force Grey,
a cape of the mountebank, and a wand of lightning bolts
for the book.

Stone of Golorr. If Manshoon has the Stone of Go-
lorr, he keeps it in the drawer of the table along with
his ledger.

SPECIAL EVENTS

You can use one or more of the following special events
before or after the characters explore Kolat Towers and
Manshoon's extradimensional sanctum.

BLACKMAILED L.ORDS

The events described in this section might occur if the
characters obtain the ledger from area E13 and use the
information in it to confront either Corylus Thann or
Jelenn Urmbrusk about their suspicious dealings with
Manshoon. The Thann and Umbrusk families have
walled estates in the Sea Ward.

CORYLUS THANN

The Thanns are Waterdeep's most prominent vint-
ners and have deep roots in the city. Corylus (LE male
Tethyrian human noble) is happy to let other members



@@@ 3 @@@



of his family manage the wine business while he fo-
cuses on his duties as a Masked Lord. Unfortunately, he
lacks the principles and sound judgment that have led
to House Thann's success in the past. He also places
the welfare of humans above nonhumans. In the past,
he has used Zhentarim thugs to inflict harm on nonhu-
mans who sought positions of political power in the city.
Now the Zhents are blackmailing Corylus, threatening
to expose his bigotry unless he uses his influence as a
Masked Lord to cover up their illegal activities.

The characters are most likely to encounter Corylus
as he travels through the city by coach, accompanied
by six human guards who watch his back and keep the
rabble at bay. Corylus refuses to speak with the party.
If the characters become an annovance, he has eight
crooked members of the City Watch (human veterans)
crack down on them, then uses his position as Masked
Lord to clear any charges leveled against these Watch
members. Corylus refuses to be indebted to anyone, so
any attempt by the characters to curry favor with him is
met with suspicion, if not outright hostility. Even if they
dispose of Manshoon, Corylus refuses to acknowledge
that he owes them anything.

JELENN URMBRUSK
Jelenn (N female Tethyrian human noble) is a proud
woman in her fifties who desperately wants to get out of
debt. Several bad investments ruined her money-lend-
‘ing business, and most of her reliable customers have
turned to other providers such as the Cassalanters.
Jelenn could have borrowed money from any of a num-
ber of nobles in the city or sold off some of the property
her family owns in Waterdeep, but doing so would have
turned her private financial woes into local gossip. Fear
of that exposure led her to borrow money from the
Zhentarim instead—a decision she has come to regret.
The Zhents working for Manshoon promise to keep
their relationship secret on the condition that she do
everything in her power to further the group’s welfare in
Waterdeep.

When not dealing with her slimy creditors, Jelenn is
occupied with Masked Lord business. She has no time
for a face-to-face meeting with anyone she doesn't know.
Characters can confront her as she comes or goes to
and from her villa, but she never travels without sixteen
guards who form a protective wall around her. If the
characters brazenly mention Manshoon or the Zhen-
tarim by name to her, Jelenn demands that they leave
her alone or face dire consequences. Jelenn's threat is
mostly bluster, since she's not eager to make enemies.

If the characters free Jelenn from the yoke of the Black
Network by defeating Manshoon, her debt is effectively
canceled. In her delight, she grants them a special favor
(see “Special Favors” in chapter 7 of the Dungeon Mas-
ter’s Gruide). On the other hand, if they threaten to go to
the press with Manshoon's ledger in an attempt to black-
mail or discredit her, she pretends to go along with them
while secretly using her influence as a Masked Lord to
make their lives difficult.

@ CHAFPTER 8 | WINTER WIZARDRY

DEADWINTER DAY FEAST

The Fellowship of Innkeepers—in conjunction with the
Bakers' Guild, the Guild of Butchers, and the Vintners',
Distillers’, and Brewers' Guild—decides to hold a Dead-
winter Day feast for the residents of Trollskull Alley.
Broxley Fairkettle (see “Sample Guild Representatives,”
page 41) asks the characters if they would be willing

to host the feast in their tavern. He believes the gesture
would be appreciated by their neighbors, in light of the
recent deaths in the area (see chapter 3).

If the characters offer up their tavern for the feast,
guild representatives arrive to stock and decorate it for
the event. During the three days before the holiday, the
tavern is bustling with activity and excitement. Hun-
dreds show up on the day of the feast to partake—not
only residents of Trollskull Alley, but also folk from
neighboring streets. There’s plenty of food to go around,
but the tavern practically groans under the weight of the
crowd, and additional tables are set up outside to handle
the overflow. People don't appear to mind, even as heavy
snow begins to fall, Members of the City Watch are on
hand to make sure everyone behaves.

Nothing violent happens during the Deadwinter Day
feast, but the tavern suffers damage as a result of the
crowds. The Carpenters’, Roofers’, and Plaisterers’
Guild offers to make repairs for free, but the characters
must close the establishment for a tenday to facilitate
the work. The closure has no effect on business in the
long term, however, since the feast fosters such goodwill
that clients return in force when the tavern reopens.

The feast is a great opportunity for characters to
hobnob with neighbors, guild members, and City Watch
constables, as well as to gather information on local
happenings.

SECRET SIMULACRUM

If the characters make an enemy of Manshoon, he tries
to capture one of them and replace that character with
a magical duplicate created using the simulacrum spell.
If one of the players is absent for a game session and
circumstances allow it, Manshoon targets that character
for replacement while the rest of the party is distracted
by other matters. You don't need to roleplay the char-
acter's capture; just assume it happens. To create a
simulacrum of the character, Manshoon needs some
hair, fingernail clippings, or other piece of the charac-
ter's body. Once he obtains the necessary components
from the captured character, he creates the simulacrum
and sends it to the party with instructions to spy on the
group and undermine it from within.

If Manshoon embeds a simulacrum within the party,
talk privately to the player whose character has been
replaced. Then have that player run the simulacrum
until it is destroyed or the character it replaced is rein-
troduced. The simulacrum has the same statistics as the
character, but it has onlv half the character’s hit point
maximum and can't gain levels,
